Sticks & Stones: 

Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 
 
Readings 
 

THE CYCLE OF SOCIALIZATION1 
BOBBIE HARRO 

 

INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 
 
Often, when people begin to study the phenomenon of oppression, they start with recognizing that 
human beings are different from each other in many ways based upon gender, ethnicity, skin color, 
first language, age, ability, status, religion, sexual orientation, and economic class.  The obvious first 
leap that people make is the assumption that if we just began to appreciate differences, and treat 
each other with respect, then everything would be all right, and there would be no oppression.  This 
view is represented beautifully by the now famous quote from Rodney King in response to the riots 
following his beating and the release of the police officers who were filmed beating him:  "Why can't 
we all just get along?"  It should be that simple, but it isn't. 
 Instead, we are each born into a specific set of social identities, related to the categories of 
difference mentioned above, and these social identities predispose us to unequal roles in the dynamic 
system of oppression.  We are then socialized by powerful sources in our worlds to play the roles 
prescribed by an inequitable social system (Hardiman and Jackson 1997).  This socialization process 
is pervasive (coming from all sides and sources), consistent (patterned and predictable), circular (self-
supporting), self-perpetuating (intradependent) and often visible (unconscious and unnamed) (Bell 
1997).  All of these characteristics will be clarified in the description of the cycle of socialization that 
follows. 
 In struggling to understand what roles we have been socialized to play, how we are affected by 
issues of oppression in our lives, and how we participate in maintaining them, we must begin by 
making an inventory of our own social identities with relationship to each issue of oppression.  An 
excellent first learning activity is to make a personal inventory of our various social identities relating 
to the categories -- gender, race, age, sexual orientation, religion, economic class, and 
ability/disability status.  The results of this inventory make up the mosaic of social identities (our social 
identity profile) that shape(s) our socialization (Harro 1986, Griffin 1997). 
 We get systematic training in "how to be" each of our social identities throughout our lives. The 
cycle of socialization that follows is one way of representing how the socialization process happens, 
from what source it comes, how it affects our lives, and how it perpetuates itself.  The "Directions for 
Change" that conclude this chapter suggest ways for interrupting the cycle of socialization and taking 
charge of our own lives.  For purposes of learning, it is often useful to choose only one of our social 
identities, and trace it through the cycle of socialization, since it can be quite overwhelming to explore 
seven identities at once. 
 
1 Readings in diversity and social justice by Adams, Maurianne.  Copyright 2010 by ROUTLEDGE (UK) -- BOOKS.  Reproduced with 
permission of ROUTLEDGE (UK) -- BOOKS in the format Copy via Copyright Clearance Center. 

                                            
 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 1 | P a g e  



 
 

 
 
Fig 2.1 The Cycle of Socialization 

 

THE BEGINNING (CIRCLE NO. 1) 
 
 Our socialization begins before we are born, with no choice on our part.  No one brings us a 
survey, in the womb, inquiring into which gender, class, religion, sexual orientation, cultural group, 
ability status, or age we might want to be born.  These identities are ascribed to us at birth through no 
effort or decision or choice of our own.  There is, therefore, no reason to blame each other or hold 
each other responsible for the identities we have.  This first step in the socialization process is outside 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 2 | P a g e  



our control.  In addition to having no choice, we also have o initial consciousness about who we are.  
We don't question our identities at this point.  We just are who we are. 
 On top of these givens, we are born into a world where all of the mechanics, assumptions, 
rules, roles, and structures of oppression are already in place and functioning, we have had nothing 
to do with constructing them.  There is no reason for any of us to feel guilty or responsible for the 
world into which we are born.  We are innocents, falling into an already established system. 
 The characteristics of this system were built long before we existed, based upon history, habit, 
tradition, patterns of belief, prejudices, stereotypes, and myths.  Dominant or agent groups are 
considered the "norm" around which assumptions are built, and these groups receive attention and 
recognition.  Agents have relatively more social power, and can "name" others.  They are privileged 
at birth, and ascribed access to options and opportunities, often without realizing it.  We are "lucky" to 
be born into these groups and rarely question it.  Agent groups include men, white people, middle- 
and upper-class people, abled people, middle-aged people, heterosexuals, and gentiles. 
 On the other hand, there are many social identity groups about which little or nothing is known 
because they have not been considered important enough to study.  These are referred to as 
subordinate groups or target groups.  Some target groups are virtually invisible while others are 
defined by misinformation or very limited information.  Targets are disenfranchised, exploited, and 
victimized by prejudice, discrimination, and other structural obstacles.  Target groups include women;  
racially oppressed groups; gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgendered people; disabled people; Jews; 
elders; youth; and people living in poverty (Baker-Miller 1976; Hardiman and Jackson 1997).  We are 
"unlucky" to be born into target groups and therefore devalued by the existing society.  Both groups 
are dehumanized by being socialized into prescribed roles without consciousness or permission. 
 

FIRST SOCIALIZATION (ARROW NO. 1) 
 
 Immediately upon our births we begin to be socialized by the people we love and trust the 
most, our families or the adults who are raising us.  They shape our self-concepts and self-
perceptions, the norms and rules we must follow, the roles we are taught to play, our expectations for 
the future, and our dreams.  These people serve as role models for us, and they teach us how to 
behave.  This socialization happens both intrapersonally (how we think about ourselves), and 
interpersonally (how we relate to others).  We are told things like, "Boys don't cry"; “You shouldn't 
trust white people"; "They're better than we are. Stay in your place"; “Don't worry if you break the toy.  
We can always buy another one"; “Christianity is the true religion"; “Children should be seen and not 
heard"; “Don't tell anyone that your aunt is mentally retarded. It's embarrassing"; and "Don't kiss other 
girls.  You're supposed to like boys."  These messages are an automatic part of our early 
socialization, and we don't initially question them.  We are too dependent on our parents or those 
raising us, and we haven't yet developed the ability to think for ourselves, so we unconsciously 
conform to their views. 
 It is important to observe that they, too, are not to be blamed. They are doing the best they can 
to raise us, and they only have their own backgrounds from which to draw.  They may not have 
thought critically about what they are teaching us, and may be unconsciously passing on what was 
taught to them.  Some of us have been raised by parents who have though critically about the 
messages that they are giving us, but they are still not in the majority. This could be good or bad, as 
well, depending on what their views are.  A consciously racist parent may intentionally pass on racist 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 3 | P a g e  



beliefs to his children, and a consciously feminist parent may intentionally pass on non-stereotypical 
roles to her children, so it can go either way.   
 Regardless of the content of the teaching, we have been exposed, without initial question, to a 
strong set of rules, roles, and assumptions that cannot help but shape our sense of ourselves and the 
world.  They influence what we take with us when we venture out of our protected family units into the 
larger world of other institutions. 
 A powerful way to check out the accuracy of these assertions is to choose one of our social 
identities and write down at least ten examples of what we learned about being that identity.  It's 
helpful to consider whether we chose an agent or a target identity.  We may find that we have thought 
more about our target identities, and therefore they are easier to inventory.  Gender rules are 
sometimes the easiest, so we might start there.  We might also consider doing it for an agent group 
identity, like males, white people, heterosexuals, gentiles, adults, middle-class people, able-bodies or 
able-minded people.  Most likely, we will find it easier to list learnings for targeting groups than for 
agent groups. 
 

INSTITUTIONAL AND CULTURAL SOCIALIZATION (CIRCLE NO. 2) 
 
 Once we begin to attend school, go to a place of worship, visit a medical facility, play on a 
sports team, work with a social worker, seek services or products from a business, or learn about 
laws and the legal system, our socialization sources are rapidly multiplied based on how many 
institutions with which we have contact.  Most of the messages we receive about how to be, whom to 
"look up to" and "look down on," what rules to follow, what roles to play, what assumptions to make, 
what to believe, and what to think will probably reinforce or contradict what we have learned at home. 
 We might learn at school that girls shouldn't be interested in a woodworking shop class, that 
only white students go out for the tennis team, that kids who learn differently or think independently 
get put in special education, that it's okay for wealthy kids to miss classes for a family vacation, that 
it's okay to harass the boy who walks and talks like a girl, that most of the kids who drop out are from 
the south side of town, that "jocks" don't have to do the same work that nerds" do to pass, or that kids 
who belong to another religious group are "weird."  We learn who gets preferential treatment, and 
who gets picked on.  We are exposed to rules, roles, and assumptions that are not fair to everyone. 
 If we are member of the groups that benefit from the rules, we may not notice that they aren't 
fair.  If we are members of the groups that are penalized by the rules, roles, and assumptions are part 
of a structure that is larger than just our families.  We get consistent similar messages from religion, 
the family doctor, the social worker, the local store, or the police office, and so it is hard to not believe 
what we are learning.  We learn that black people are more likely to steal so store detectives follow 
them in stores.  Boys are expected to fight and use violence, so they are encouraged to learn how.  
We shouldn't stare at or ask questions about disabled people; it isn't polite.  Gay and lesbian people 
are sick and perverted.  Kids who live in certain sections of town are probably on welfare, taking our 
hard-earned tax dollars.  Money talks.  White means good; black means bad.  Girls are responsible 
for birth control. It's a man's world.  Jews are cheap.  Arabs are terrorists. And so on. 
  We are inundated with unquestioned and stereotypical messages that shape how we think and 
what we believe about ourselves and others.  What makes this "brainwashing" even more insidious is 
the fact that it is woven into every structural thread of the fabric of our culture.  The media (television, 
the Internet, advertising, newspapers, and radio), our language patterns, the lyrics to songs, our 
cultural practices and holidays, and the very assumptions on which our society is built all contribute to 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 4 | P a g e  



the reinforcement of the biased messages and stereotypes we receive.  Think about Howard Stern, 
Jerry Springer, Married with Children, beer and car advertising, talk radio, girl vs. man, Christmas 
vacation, the Rolling Stones' "Under My Thumb," the "old boy's network," and websites that foster 
hate.  We could identity thousands of examples to illustrate the oppressive messages that bombard 
us daily from various institutions and aspects of our culture, reinforcing our divisions and "justifying" 
discrimination and prejudice. 

 
ENFORCEMENTS (ARROW NO. 2) 
 
 It might seem logical to ask why people don't just begin to think independently if they don't like 
what they are seeing around them.  Why don't we ignore these messages if we are uncomfortable 
with them, or if they are hurting us?  Largely, we don't ignore the messages, rules, roles, structures, 
and assumptions because there are enforcements in place to maintain them.  People who try to 
contradict the "norm" pay a price for their independent thinking, and people  who conform 
(consciously or unconsciously) minimally receive the benefit of being left alone for not making waves, 
such as acceptance in their designated roles, being considered normal or "a team player," or being 
allowed to stay in their places.  Maximally, they receive rewards and privileges for maintaining the 
status quo such as access to higher laces; attention and recognition for having "made it" or being the 
model member of their group; or the privilege that brings them money, connections, or power. 
  People who go against the grain of conventional societal messages are accused of being 
troublemakers, of making waves, or of being "the cause of the problem."  If they are members of 
target groups, they are held up as examples of why this group is inferior to the agent group.  
Examples of this include the significantly higher numbers of people of color who are targeted by the 
criminal justice system.  Although the number of white people who are committing crimes is just as 
high, those whites are much less likely to be arrested, charged, tried, convicted, or sentenced to jail 
than are people of color.  Do different laws apply depending on a person's skin color?  Battering 
statistics are rising as more women assert their equal rights with men, and the number one suspect 
for the murder of women in the United States is the husband or boyfriend.  Should women who try to 
be equal with men be killed? The rationale given by some racists for the burning of black churches 
was that "they were getting too strong."  Does religious freedom and the freedom to assemble apply 
only to white citizens?  Two men walking together in a southeastern U.S. city were beaten, and one 
dies, because "they were walking so close, they must be gay."  Are two men who refuse to abide by 
the "keep your distance" rule for men so threatening that they must be attacked and killed?  These 
examples of differential punishment being given to members or perceived embers of target groups 
are only half of the picture. 
 If members of agent groups break the rules, they too are punished.  White people who support 
their colleagues of color may be called "n----- lover."  Heterosexual men who take on primary child-
care responsibilities, cry easily, or hug their male friends are accused of being dominated by their 
spouses, of being "sissies," or being gay.  Middle-class people who work as advocates on economic 
issues are accused of being do-gooders or self-righteous liberals.  Heterosexuals who work for the 
rights of gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgendered people are immediately suspected of being "in the 
closet" themselves.  

 
 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 5 | P a g e  



RESULTS (CIRCLE NO. 3) 
 
 It is not surprising that the results of this systematic learning are devastating to all involved.  If 
we are examining our target identities, we may experience anger, a sense of being silenced, 
dissonance between what the United States stands for and what we experience, low self-esteem, 
high levels of stress, a sense of hopelessness and disempowerment that can lead to crime and self-
destructive behavior, frustration, mistrust, and dehumanization.  By participating in our roles as 
targets we reinforce stereotypes, collude in our own demise, and perpetuate the system of 
oppression.  This learned helplessness is often called internalized oppression because we have 
learned to become our own oppressors from within. 
 If we are examining our agent identities, we may experience guilt from unearned privilege or 
oppressive acts, fear of payback, tendency to collude in the system to be self-protective, high levels 
of stress, ignorance of and loss of contact with the target groups, as sense of distorted reality about 
how the world is, fear of rising crimes and violence levels, limited worldview, obliviousness to the 
damage we do, and dehumanization.  By participating in our roles as agents, and remaining 
unconscious of or being unwilling to interrupt the cycle, we perpetuate the system of oppression.   
 These results are often cited as the problems facing our society today:  high drop-out rates, 
crime, poverty, drugs, and so on.  Ironically, the root causes of them are inherent in the very 
assumptions on which the society is built:  dualism, hierarchy, competition, individualism, domination, 
colonialism, and the scarcity principle.  To the extent that we fail to interrupt this cycle we keep the 
assumptions, the problems, and the oppression alive. 
 A way that we might personally explore this model is to take one of the societal problems and 
trace its root causes back through the cycle to the core belief systems of patterns in U.S. society that 
feed and play host to it.  It is not a coincidence that the United States is suffering from these results 
today; rather, it is a logical outcome of our embracing the status quo, without thinking or challenging. 

 
ACTIONS (ARROW NO. 3) 
 
 When we arrive at the results of this terrible cycle, we face the decision of what to do next.  It is 
easiest to do nothing, and simply to allow the perpetuation of the status quo.  We may choose not to 
make waves, to stay in our familiar patterns.  We may say, "Oh well, it's been that way for hundreds 
of years.  What can I do to change it? It is a huge phenomenon, and my small efforts won't count for 
much."  Many of us choose to do nothing because it is (for a while) easier to stay with what is familiar.  
Besides, it is frightening to try to interrupt something so large.  "What does it have to do with me, 
anyway?" say many agents.  "This isn't my problem.  I am above this."  We fail to realize that we have 
become participants just by doing nothing. This cycle has a life of its sown.  It doesn't need our active 
support because it has its own centrifugal force.  It goes on, and unless we choose to interrupt it, it 
will continue to go on.  Our silence is consent.  Until our discomfort becomes larger than our comfort, 
we will probably stay in this cycle. 
 Some of us who are targets have been so beaten down by the relentless messages of the 
cycle that we have given up and resigned ourselves to survive it or to self-destruct.  We are the 
victims of the cycle, and are playing our roles as victims to keep the cycle alive.  We will probably go 
around a few more times before we die.  It hurts too much to fight such a big cycle.  We need the help 
of our brothers and sisters and our agent allies to try for change. 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 6 | P a g e  



THE CORE AT THE CENTER OF THE CYCLE 
 
 We are blocked from action by the fear and insecurity that we have been taught.  We have 
been kept ignorant and confused by the myths and misinformation that we have been fed, and we 
lack a core of confidence and vision to guide us.  We don't know how to take action against a system 
so powerful and pervasive.  As long as our core is filled with these negative elements, we will be 
paralyzed and will re-create the same cycle again. 
 Somehow, however, change and hope still find their way to the surface.  Perhaps someone's 
discomfort or pain becomes larger than her complacency.  Perhaps strength, encouragement, 
determination, love, hope, or connection to other people being to grow in someone's core, and he 
decides to take a different direction, and to interrupt this cycle. 
 

DIRECTION FOR CHANGE 
 
 Some of us who are targets try to interrupt the cycle, because for us the discomfort has gotten 
larger than the comfort.  If we try this alone, or without organization, we may be kicked back down to 
our powerless positions.  If we begin a new direction, and even work with our agent allies, however, 
we can create our own hope. 
 Some of us who are agents may decide to use our power and privilege to try to make change -
- either out of guilt, moral values, or vision.  If our motivation is guilt, we are doomed to fail.  But if we 
operate from a strong moral base and vision, and if we work together with our targeted brothers and 
sisters, we create hope.  We become allies with our target groups, and build coalitions for success. 
 When groups begin to empower themselves -- by learning more about each other, by  
unlearning old myths and stereotypes, by challenging the status quo -- we make the difficult decision 
to interrupt the cycle of socialization.  We begin to question the givens, the assumptions of the 
society, the values, the rules, the roles, and even the structures.  As we attempt this, it becomes 
obvious that we cannot do it alone.  We must build coalitions with people who are like us and people 
who are different from us.  We will not be the minority if we work in coalitions.  We will gain the 
necessary vision and power to be able to construct new rules that truly are equal, roles that 
complement each other instead of competing, assumptions that value all groups instead of ascribing 
value to some and devaluating others, and structures that promote cooperation and shared power 
instead of power over each other. 
 For this new direction of action to work, we need education for critical consciousness for all 
groups.  We need to take a stand, reframe our understandings, question the status quo, and begin a 
critical transformation that can break down this cycle of socialization and start a new cycle leading to 
liberation for all.  This is possible.  We can change the world (see Harro, "The Cycle of Liberation,” 
chapter 87 of this volume), 
 
  

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 7 | P a g e  



REFLECTION QUESTIONS: 
 
1. What are some examples of socialization that someone may experience in their life? 

 
2. How is the Cycle of Socialization connected to implicit bias? 
 
  

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 8 | P a g e  



REFERENCES 
Baker-Miller, J. (1976).  Toward a New Psychology of Women.  Boston:  Beacon Press. 
Bell, L.A.  (1997). Theoretical foundations for social justice education. In M. Adams, L.A. Bell, and P. Griffin, 

ed., Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice:  A Sourcebook.  New York:  Routledge. 
Griffin, P.  (1997). Introductory module for the single issue courses. In M. Adams, L.A. Bell, and P. Griffin, ed., 

Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice:  A Sourcebook.  New York:  Routledge. 
Harro, R.I. (1986).  Teaching about Heterosexism:  A Psychological Education Design Project.  University of 

Massachusetts, Amherst:  unpublished manuscript. 
Hardiman, R. and B.W. Jackson. (1997). Conceptual Foundations for Social Justice Courses. In M. Adams, 

L.A. Bell, and P. Griffin, ed., Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice:  A Sourcebook.  New York:  
Routledge. 

 

Sticks & Stones: 
Understanding Implicit Bias, Microaggressions, & Stereotypes 9 | P a g e