DISFIGURED
ON FAIRY TALES, DISABILITY,
AND MAKING SPACE

AMANDA LEDUC

COACH HOUSE BOOKS, TORONTO



copyright © Amanda Leduc, 2020

first edition

Published with the generous assistance of the Canada Council for the Arts
and the Ontario Arts Council. Coach House Books also gratefully acknowl-
edges the support of the Government of Canada through the Canada Book
Fund and the Government of Ontario through the Ontario Book Publishing
Tax Credit.

library and archives canada cataloguing in publication

Title: Disfigured : on fairy tales, disability, and making space / Amanda Leduc.
Names: Leduc, Amanda, author.
Series: Exploded views.
Description: Series statement: Exploded views
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 2019014453X | Canadiana (ebook)
20190144564 | isbn 9781552453957 (softcover) | isbn 9781770566057
(pdf) | isbn 9781770566040 (epub)
Subjects: lcsh: Fairy tales—History and criticism. | lcsh: Disabilities in
literature. | lcsh: People with disabilities in literature.
Classification: lcc pn3437 .l43 2020 | ddc 398/.3561—dc23

Disfigured is available as an ebook: isbn 978 1 77056 604 0 (epub), isbn 978
1 77056 605 7 (pdf).

Purchase of the print version of this book entitles you to a free digital copy.
To claim your ebook of this title, please email sales@chbooks.com with proof
of purchase. (Coach House Books reserves the right to terminate the free
download o>er at any time.)



For Dorothy, who showed me the path into the woods;

For Jael, who helped me to see that I was brave enough
to follow it;

And for all of my disabled brothers and sisters, who
held my hands so that I did not go down the path alone.



No one ever sees Sophocles’ play as a drama about
a cripple and a blind man fighting over Thebes.

– Tobin Siebers

Your once-silken voice will desert you, your legs
will make every step on land a torture.
There will come a time when you miss
the seaweed and seals, your old ways,
your old body. Now fit for neither land
nor sea, your sacrifice long in the past now.
Comb your hair, which keeps growing,
though you’ve lost your prince.
You know the time is coming
where you’ll pay the price
for your short time in the sun.

– Jeannine Hall Gailey



Introduction

R ather appropriately, the idea for this book came to me
while I was in the forest. In the summer of 2018 I had the

extraordinary good fortune to participate in a three-week writ-
ing retreat at Hedgebrook Farm, on Whidbey Island o> the
coast of Seattle. I was working on a novel, and after a particu-
larly challenging day took myself out to the woods to try and
find some solace. There was a walking stick at the front door
of my cottage, and I took it without thinking, then set o>
toward the back of the property. Somewhere at the far north
end of the farm was a blackberry bush, and I was eager to
reach it and fill my hands with berries.

As I walked, I thought idly about how much easier going it
was with the walking stick – an inanimate companion to help
me along through all of the forest’s dips and swells and hollows.
It was helpful even on the paved ground closer to my residence.
With the walking stick in my hand, I felt sure of myself, confi-
dent. It balanced my weight as I shifted from foot to foot in a
way that was thrillingly surprising. 

Does this mean I should use a cane in regular life? I
wondered as I made my way to the blackberries. Would it
be helpful? How would that change the way I move through
the world?

I don’t use a cane in my day-to-day. I have mild cerebral
palsy and spastic hemiplegia, and though I walk with a visible



limp, my balance has been good enough, for my first three
and a half decades, to allow me to walk unaided. 

But I do stare at the ground when I walk, a fact that I was
completely unaware of until a chiropodist pointed it out at an
appointment when I was twenty-seven. It took a few more
years for me to realize that I stare at the ground because the
ground is full of danger – unpredictable and capricious, with
gaps between concrete blocks, uneven bricks, cracks in the
sidewalk. If I do not pay attention to where my feet are all the
time, it’s pretty much guaranteed that I will fall at some point
in my walking.

A cane, I thought, would probably be helpful. 
For many of us with physical disabilities, the forest is often

a dangerous place to be. There’s no hope of taking a wheelchair
into the trees unless there’s a clearly marked and flattened
path; it can be di?cult to navigate a forest even with a guide
dog at your side. I’d wager that the forest presents trouble
perhaps even for those whose disabilities are often deemed
invisible – it can be a dark place, filled with all manner of
smells and sensory onslaughts, a place where even the able-
bodied can lose themselves.

A princess in a wheelchair would have trouble finding those
blackberries, I thought as I crept through the bushes. And then
I stopped, briefly, and smiled. A princess in a wheelchair?
Whoever heard of such a thing?

But by the time I reached the blackberry bush, that
unknown princess in her wheelchair was all I could think
about. That princess, and the seven dwarfs who helped Snow
White, and Rumpelstiltskin, and the ugliness of the Beast in
‘Beauty and the Beast,’ the evil queen in ‘Snow White’ who
transforms herself into a hunchbacked old woman, the prince
who goes blind after the witch casts Rapunzel from her tower,

10 | D I S F I G U R E D



the princess who falls into a long, enchanted sleep. The witch
with the crutch in ‘Hansel and Gretel,’ the stepsisters who get
their eyes plucked out by doves in ‘Aschenputtel’ – the Brothers
Grimm version of ‘Cinderella’ – and all the ugly princes and
princesses who gain the throne by their cunning and then are
made or revealed to be beautiful after all. 

And suddenly I was no longer alone in the forest; suddenly
I was thinking about these connections, disability and fairy
tales, how obvious, how had I not considered these things
before? 

This needed to be an essay, I thought. But no doubt it was
already an essay; no doubt the link between fairy tales and
disability had been written about a million times before. There
was so much in there that one could write about. People far
smarter than I had no doubt already done it, and done it well.
I filled my soul with blackberries and went back to my cottage.
I went back to working on the novel.

I also kept thinking about that long stretch of moments in
the forest. Disability and fairy tales. Disability in fairy tales.
When I got home I did some research and found surprisingly
little on the topic; sure that I was missing something, I dug a
little harder. My digging brought me Ann Schmiesing and her
wonderful book Disability, Deformity, and Disease in the
Grimms’ Fairy Tales. My digging brought me to Sharon Snyder
and David T. Mitchell and their work on narrative prosthesis,
to the work of disability-studies scholar Tobin Siebers, to the
fantastic breadth of scholarship a>orded by Jack Zipes. 

And it brought me, again, to the fairy tales. So many darker
versions of the Disney stories that I’d known as a child – and
so many darker moments in the Disney stories, too. Why was
Scar, the villain of The Lion King, known only by the mark
that slashed his face? Why did the depiction of the ‘hunchback’

11



Quasimodo make my skin crawl? Why hadn’t I ever thought
of The Little Mermaid’s Ariel in those moments just after she’d
arrived on land with legs and seen myself in her unsteady
posture and stumbling? 

Why, in all of these stories about someone who wants to
be something or someone else, was it always the individual
who needed to change, and never the world? 

Disfigured is my attempt at unravelling some of the more
well-known Western fairy-tale archetypes in light of a disabil-
ity rights framework. In order to understand how we move on
from the damage that these archetypes can do, we first need
to understand what put them in place – why the disfigured
body has historically been seen as less than whole; why fairy
tales, narratives so often associated with seeming empower-
ment, have provided a breeding ground for anti-disability
narrative; and how the allure and the potency of these stories
has continued to influence the perceptions of disability today.
To reclaim disability narrative in storytelling, we need to
understand why stories like fairy tales have been fascinated
with it right from the very beginning, and how the stories we
tell have maligned di>erence – and disability – in order to
make sense of it in the world. 

A few notes. As someone who grew up on Western fairy tales
and their various interpretations, it is my intention to stay in
my lane, as it were, and focus the majority of this book on
fairy tales and several pop culture hero narratives that are
familiar to a Western audience. While I make mention of
several tales from other cultures in an e>ort to show the perva-
siveness of certain archetypes, the bulk of this book remains
focused on Western stories and several modern interpretations
that stem from predominantly European frameworks. I very

12 | D I S F I G U R E D



much hope this book can contribute to the conversations
around disability in fairy tales from other cultures, and look
forward to continued learning around this. 

It’s also important to note that this book is not a work of
fairy-tale scholarship. My intention is to approach fairy tales
from the perspective of someone who has loved them but
operated with what amounts to a layperson’s knowledge of
the tales throughout most of her life. I am interested specifically
in where the fairy-tale narrative and its archetypes intersect
with disability representation, and have used that framework
to guide the book. As such, my interpretations of several tales
and their relationships to disability may at times seem to
group certain tales together that have traditionally been consid-
ered very di>erent from one another (for example, in the
sections on the tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Chris-
tian Andersen’s ‘The Little Mermaid’). 

Nor is this book meant to be a work of disability scholar-
ship. I am a physically disabled woman who also deals with a
major depressive disorder, and while I use my own experience
to explore fairy tales and their cultural impact in the world, it
is not my intention here to speak for the field of disability
studies or for all disabled people, or for all those who likewise
deal with their own mental health challenges on a regular
basis. Disability is not a monolith – every disabled person’s
experience in the world is di>erent, and the way that we all
navigate the world is likewise varied and complex.

I also think it’s important to note that my experience as a
white disabled woman makes my ability to comment on
multiple marginalizations within the disabled community
necessarily limited. We need to make space for, pay attention
to, and elevate the stories of disabled people from ibpoc
(Indigenous, Black, and People of Colour) communities. The

13



question of how the Western fairy-tale framework has
contributed to the colonialist and capitalist structures that
continue to disenfranchise ibpoc disabled communities today
is one that all white disabled people should be asking, no
matter the intersections within our own communities, and I
hope that the questions posed in this book can help to spark
further conversations around how fairy tales have impacted
and hurt disabled ibpoc communities in particular. It is my
hope this book can speak to people in whatever way they
need, and that in telling my own particular story and exploring
the way disability operates in some of the Western world’s
best-known fairy tales, this book can help further the conver-
sation around disability representation in the stories we tell
in our modern world. 

Interspersed throughout Disfigured are doctor’s notes from
the initial consultation that my parents had with the neuro-
surgeon who operated on me when I was four. I have included
excerpts from these notes because understanding the story
my parents were told about my disability – and, indeed, the
story my doctors told themselves about it – has been crucial
to my own understanding of how my disability operates in
my life today. In sharing my doctor’s words here, my aim is to
take back the narrative. However, I want to stress that medical
records are not something disabled people should be expected
to share as a part of our stories, and while I have been incredibly
fortunate – and privileged – in my experience with the medical
world, I am well aware that this is not the case for many. 

I spoke with many disabled individuals over the course of
writing Disfigured, and as a general rule use identity-first
language throughout the text, unless otherwise requested.
 Identity-first language (‘disabled person’) holds that the
disabled identity is an important part of what makes someone

14 | D I S F I G U R E D



a person in the first place, inextricably bound up with how
someone navigates the world. Person-first language, by
contrast, argues that an individual must be seen as a person
first and someone with a disability second (‘person with a
disability’). The general consensus among disability activists
is that person-first language, while well-meaning, separates
disability from identity and thus continues to malign disability
and perpetuate the idea that it is a negative thing.

The disabilities and pronouns of every individual cited in
this book have been expressed according to their wishes. 

I am grateful to all of those who chose to share their time
and expertise with me. It is my fervent hope that the explo-
rations in this book do everybody justice. 

15



2
Disability: A Fairy Tale

Disabled:
1a: impaired or limited by a physical, mental, cognitive, or
developmental condition : a"ected by disability 
b: incapacitated by illness or injury 
2: of a device or mechanism : rendered inoperative (as by
being damaged or deliberately altered) 

In English, the word disabled comes to us as the past participle
of disable. From the Latin dis (‘to do the opposite of’) and

the Old French (h)able (‘capable, fitting, suitable, agile,
nimble’), itself from the Latin verb habere – to hold and receive.
It came into use as a term in the sixteenth century. Once used
primarily for impairments of a physical nature, it is now widely
recognized as a term that applies to all manner of impairments.
According to the World Health Organization, disabilities

is an umbrella term, covering impairments, activity limi-
tations, and participation restrictions. An impairment is a
problem in body function or structure; an activity limita-
tion is a di!culty encountered by an individual in execut-
ing a task or action; while a participation restriction is a
problem experienced by an individual in involvement in
life situations. Disability is thus not just a health problem.
It is a complex phenomenon, reflecting the interaction



between features of a person’s body and features of the
society in which he or she lives.

It is a complex phenomenon in part due to the growing preva-
lence of the social model of disability, which holds that the
disability of individuals is, in fact, maintained by systemic
barriers, exclusion, and negative attitudes toward these disabil-
ities more than the physical limitations of the conditions them-
selves. (If a building has elevators and accessible entryways,
the fact that a person uses a wheelchair doesn’t limit them in
the building in any way; by contrast, a building with an inac-
cessible doorway and no elevators is a barrier because a person
with accessibility needs cannot go through it, thus indicating
that, on a structural level, the design of the building has failed
to take the considerations of every di"erent body into account.)
The social model of disability stands in contrast to the medical
model, which links a body directly to a diagnosis and places
emphasis on the intervention of medicine as a way of solving
or eradicating the particular disability or condition. ‘The
medical model,’ notes Tobin Siebers, ‘defines disability as an
individual defect lodged in the person, a defect that must be
cured or eliminated if the person is to achieve full capacity as
a human being.’ It’s not that society needs to be fixed, in other
words – it’s the person who is broken. ‘Medicine and charity,’
says Siebers, ‘[and] not social justice, are the answers to the
problem of the disabled body, because the disabled body is
thought to be the real cause of the problems.’

In the medical model, disability is both a reality of life as
well as a kind of storytelling. Every disabled story becomes a
narrative – a story that has everything to do with what culture
perceives of as good (able-bodiedness, beauty) and bad (disabil-
ity, disfigurement), and how we, as a society, are supposed to

36 | D I S F I G U R E D



act toward one another – and what society, or the higher powers
that be, will do to us in return. Quite apart from its own physical
realities – from the disabled person’s own physical realities –
a disability thus becomes a symbol for everyone else, an ‘other
other,’ in Siebers’s words, operating as a kind of intellectual
bogeyman for the well – a whispering darkness that sits on
the edge of the perceived order of the world.

In short, in the medical model, disability is almost always
the villain. Disability is di"erent because there is an assump-
tion that there is one way of moving through the world – one
way of walking, one way of seeing, one way of smell and
touch, of processing information. Deviations from this
assumption must therefore both require and generate expla-
nations. A child is born with a cyst in her brain but should
have been born with none, and therefore the reasons for it
must be uncovered: genetic defect, in-utero injury, identifiable
condition. Otherwise, how to place her? How to understand
where she fits into the world? The narrative around her
disability follows the same structure as the fairy tales she
reads in bed at night with her mother: problem, quest, return.
In the medical model, the ‘return’ involves the acquisition/
reacquisition of an able-bodied life inasmuch as this is possible
– think gene therapy, think cochlear implants, think searching
for a cure. 

But before we had the medical model, before we had
science, we had storytelling in all of its inscrutable magic.
How else to make sense of a child born with a malformed
limb than by telling a story about it – encasing the limb in a
glass co!n of story that reaches back to magic and the gods,
ever inscrutable themselves? Stories impose order even on
unruly bodies. When you make something inconceivable into

37



a story, suddenly it gains legitimacy, suddenly it operates in
the realm of the possible. 

So, too, with bodies that are di"erent. 

‘Fairy tales,’ argues the renowned fairy-tale scholar Jack Zipes,
‘are informed by a human disposition to action – to transform
the world and make it more adaptable to human needs, while
we also try to change and make ourselves fit for the world.
Therefore, the focus of fairy tales, whether oral, written, or
cinematic, has always been on finding magical instruments,
extraordinary technologies, or powerful people and animals
that will enable protagonists to transform themselves along
with their environment, making it more suitable for living in
peace and contentment.’ 

Fairy tales are among those most quintessential of stories
– the ones we tell to make sense of ourselves and of the world.
They are both a way of explaining the world around us and a
method of imagining a world that is possible. ‘Early oral tales,’
notes Zipes, ‘were closely tied to the rituals, customs and
beliefs of tribes, communities and trades. They fostered a
sense of belonging and hope that miracles involving some
kind of magical transformation were possible to bring about
a better world.’ 

Imagining a world that is possible becomes particularly
important when one considers fairy tales in light of the times
in which they were told. It is hard to conceive of the possibility
of a ct scan when you live in a society that hasn’t yet discovered
electricity; it is much easier to conceive of and believe in magic,
and so too in potions and fairy dust and magical godmothers,
or genies who can grant wishes. Fairy tales have in so many
ways concerned themselves with transformation. But because
their creators – perhaps particularly in the Western world –

38 | D I S F I G U R E D



were often not able to envision the full possibilities of science
and technology, the transformations in the fairy tales that we
know have necessarily been limited in crucial ways. 

In ‘Hans My Hedgehog,’ a tale from the Brothers Grimm,
a farmer, despairing of his and his wife’s inability to have a
child (a despair magnified by the other farmers mocking their
childlessness), exclaims that he would be happy to have a
child, ‘even if it’s a hedgehog.’ Their son, Hans My Hedgehog,
born nine months after this proclamation, is born with the
upper half of a hedgehog and the bottom half of a human.
Horrified, the parents keep their son behind the stove for
seven years, ultimately forcing Hans to go out into the world
on his own to make his fortune as a musician (he has his
father bring him back a set of bagpipes from the market) and
herder and tender of geese and pigs. 

Hans is a plucky protagonist, unafraid, despite his parents’
treatment of him, to ask for what he wants and demand better-
ments in life. He gradually amasses a reputation as an excel-
lent herder, becoming so successful at it that he is able to
return to his childhood home with a herd of pigs he sells to
benefit the town. 

Sale behind him, Hans My Hedgehog goes out into the
world once again and meets a king who has lost his way. In
exchange for directions, the king agrees to give Hans My
Hedgehog his daughter in marriage; however, once the king
has found his way and realizes the full extent of the bargain
he has made – marrying his daughter o" to a half-human
creature – he is reluctant to carry it out. For her part, the
daughter is less than pleased. As punishment for her distaste,
Hans My Hedgehog has the princess take o" her clothes, then
stabs her with his quills until she’s covered in blood. She flees
from him in disgrace, never to return to her kingdom. 

39



Sometime later, Hans My Hedgehog encounters another
king who has gotten lost in the forest. This king is also accept-
ing of Hans My Hedgehog’s help, but, more importantly, is
amenable to the price of it; as a result, Hans My Hedgehog
returns to this king’s castle and manages to get himself married
to the princess. It is to her and her alone that he reveals his
greatest secret: his hedgehogness is only a costume, a disguise
he can take o" at night. He instructs the princess and the king
to have four guards grasp his hedgehog suit when he removes
it and throw it onto the fire, thereby banishing his hedgehog-
ness forever and assuming his true, permanent guise as an
attractive young man. This feat accomplished, Hans My
Hedgehog is able to return to his parents, beautiful princess
wife in tow, and rejoice with them at the ultimate triumph
over his disfigurement. His father, overjoyed at this appearance
of a ‘normal’ son, is kind to Hans My Hedgehog for the rest of
his life. 

‘Hans My Hedgehog’ is interesting because it relies on
both the protagonist’s self-advocacy and a deep undercurrent
of social expectation. Hans is vocal about his wants and
needs, and presses his father to let him go out into the world
and live an independent life. He proves himself as a character
worthy of respect by becoming quite successful at herding
the pigs. He is also a character of no small musical skill; the
first king, hearing the beauty of his bagpipe music in the
forest, remarks on the unseen player’s talent. In his continued
work to prove who he is to the world, Hans My Hedgehog is
advocating for social change: he wants society to accept him
as he is, to recognize the gifts he can bring to the community,
hedgehog or no. There is a constant sense throughout the
tale that Hans My Hedgehog is being unfairly treated by
those he encounters. He is scorned by his parents, and the

40 | D I S F I G U R E D



first king who meets him is reluctant to give away his daugh-
ter due to his distaste for Hans My Hedgehog’s appearance.
The daughter herself is also ashamed to be around him, and
punished for her attitude. It is only the kind king and the
willing princess who learn the truth about Hans – a reward,
if you will, for their good behaviour. 

And yet, toward the end of the tale, we have the standard
fairy-tale transformation/reveal: the hedgehogness is only a
suit, one that Hans My Hedgehog can take o" at will. Hans
My Hedgehog gets the homecoming that one senses the narra-
tor has been rooting for all along: the reunification of his
family and the quiet, relieved joy of the princess, who, kindness
notwithstanding, likely much prefers her human husband to
his previous half-animal form. 

Whether it’s the pumpkin in ‘Cinderella’ or the sudden
appearance of the Little Mermaid’s human legs, fairy tales
often pivot on something or someone becoming di"erent at
some point through the text – the unattainable suddenly made
manifest through magic, fairy dust, and longing. The evil fairy
transforms a spinning wheel into an instrument of death in
‘Sleeping Beauty’; the wolf transforms/disguises himself in
‘Little Red Riding Hood.’ Cinderella herself transforms from a
scullery maid into a princess. 

But it is never society that changes, no matter how many
half-animals or scullery maids are out there arguing for their
place at the table. It is almost always the protagonists them-
selves who transform in some way – becoming more palatable,
more beautiful, more easily able to fit into the mould of society
already in place. The intervention is magical rather than surgi-
cal, but one can imagine the writers of these tales arguing in
favour of the medical model: the life-saving surgery, where
life is synonymous with social standing and regard. The child

41



who has surgery to repair their club foot is the same child
who, in a fairy tale, would likely be visited by a fairy godmother
or an evil witch, the gift of able-bodiedness dangled in front
of them in a way that’s entirely irresistible.

In fairy tales, the transformation of the individual relies
on fairies and magic – or the gods – because it is understood
that society itself can’t (and indeed won’t) improve. Again,
when viewed in the historical context of the tales, this makes
at least a small amount of sense; how to fix the world when
you are a peasant with a disabled child, possessed of little to
no power to change the place and society in which you live?
And yet the power of magic in the tales also, strangely, has
the opposite e"ect – instead of imbuing the reader with a
worldview in which change is possible and things can turn
out positively for the disenfranchised, the prevalence of magic
in fairy tales serves to reinforce the class and societal structures
already in place, as well as traditional ideas of what it means
to have a functional body in the world. This is possibly why
there’s almost always a price that a protagonist pays for the
magic of their transformation. You cannot simply move from
one place to the next – society won’t allow it. And so the
protagonist must prove their worthiness – through good deeds
and gentle behaviour, as in the case of Cinderella, or, as with
the Little Mermaid, through sacrifice and trial.

Failing that, perhaps one can find a magic fairy, or, as in
many of the Brothers Grimm tales, shore up their belief in
God. ‘While championing health and able-bodiedness as the
ideal,’ says Ann Schmiesing, ‘tales in the [Brothers Grimm]
frequently suggest that this ideal is unattainable, at least with-
out divine intervention.’

To walk, to see, to hear, to touch. Gifts worth all their trou-
ble, no matter what price must be paid. 

42 | D I S F I G U R E D



I’m four years old, soon to be five, when I leave the hospital
for the first time, after the surgery where they opened my
head and sliced out bits of the cyst. I am excited to be going
home. My mother and I have read all of the Little House on the
Prairie books while here, some of them twice. (On the Banks
of Plum Creek is my favourite. I like the idea of Mary and
Laura Ingalls living in a dugout and running through the grass
on their own roof.)

One day close to the end of my three-week stay, I come
back to my hospital room with the nurse and find my mother
and grandmother standing beside Dr. Humphreys. 

‘We have three dresses for you,’ Dr. Humphreys says. He
smiles. I like his smile a lot. ‘But you can only wear one of
them! So you need to pick which one you want to wear.’

This is a celebration dress – I know this even when I’m
four. We are celebrating because soon I’m not going to be in
the hospital anymore. Soon I won’t have any bandages. Soon
Margaret the nurse won’t need to wash my head and help
me bathe.

I don’t remember what the other dresses looked like,
but the dress I pick is pale green. It has short sleeves, and
two lines of pink ribbon down the front. The skirt puffs out
when I twirl, even though I can’t twirl very fast because of
the bandages. 

I love it. It makes me feel like a princess. 

In the social model of disability, the ‘return’ from the quest
involves a recognition of the different body and how it fits,
differently, into the world – and from there, a recognition
of how society in turn must adapt to welcome it. ‘[D]isabling
environments,’ writes Siebers, ‘produce disability in bodies

43



and require interventions at the level of social justice.’ The
social model arose in the 1960s as a response, by disabled
people, to the patriarchal nature of and infantilization inher-
ent in the medical model. Transcripts from a 1975 meeting
between the UK Disability Alliance and the Union of the
Physically Impaired Against Segregation stress the point:
‘In our view it is society which disables physically impaired
people. Disability is something imposed on top of our
impairments by the way we are unnecessarily isolated and
excluded from full participation in society.’ (‘Physically
impaired’ is historical language; though it was in use at the
time of the quote, impaired is generally considered to be
language not acceptable to use in reference to the disability
community today.) The social model of disability as a specific
term was coined in the UK in 1983 by the disabled academic
Mike Oliver. 

In the social model, there is emphasis on creating space
for wheelchairs that accommodate a body that cannot walk,
as opposed to the need to walk at all costs; there is the growing
recognition of the need for things like asl interpretation and
scent-free spaces at public events; there is, as I have touched
on, the acknowledgement that public events and spaces that
do not o"er accessible entryways or accessible washrooms fail
to consider the varied needs of the population. There is, above
all, the push for disabled people to be involved in all aspects
of decisions regarding their participation in society – and the
recognition that society has a responsibility toward all of its
citizens, up to and including the need to consider how best to
meet the varying needs of di"erent bodies. Nothing about us,
without us – a saying that has been associated with the disabil-
ity justice movement since the 1990s – encompasses much of
the ethos that underpins the social model. 

44 | D I S F I G U R E D



The social model of disability has steadily gained traction
in the years since its inception. As with other justice movements
in the early twenty-first century, the advent of social media
has proven particularly helpful and galvanizing for disability
justice activists, providing an accessible platform that many
disabled individuals are able to access and participate in,
economic barriers (access to the internet, to a computer, to a
mobile phone, to libraries) notwithstanding. In the last few
years alone, Twitter hashtags like #DisabledAndCute (started
by Black disabled writer and activist Keah Brown), #Things-
DisabledPeopleKnow (started by Black disabled writer and
activist Imani Barbarin), and #DisabilityTooWhite (started by
Black disabled activist and blogger Vilissa Thompson) have
done much to push the conversation about disability, the social
model, and access into mainstream public attention.

This is also a kind of storytelling, though firmly set in
modern packaging. But though the medium of telling is rela-
tively new, the act of storytelling itself has a long history of
speaking truth to power. The trick here is to tell stories in a
way that outlines injustice but also calls on the community
and the social structures in place to change so that anyone –
and not just a select few – might also be able to reach for
success in the future. 

‘Telling stories – that is, command of the word – was
vital if one wanted to become a leader, shaman, priest, priest-
ess, king, queen, medicine man, healer, minister, and so on,
in a particular family, clan, tribe, or small society,’ writes Jack
Zipes in The Irresistible Fairy Tale. He argues that fairy tales,
by their very nature, speak to the longing for justice that
bubbles deep in every human heart – the ability to tell a
story that captivated was, in bygone times, an essential part
of governance, inextricably bound up with power. It is

45



arguably still an essential part of governance today – one
need only look to the words of people like Barack Obama to
acknowledge the ability that words and stories have to
inflame the minds and hearts of a generation.

Conversely, one need also only look to the words of some-
one like Donald Trump to see how words can also do the oppo-
site – pack prejudice and fear into tightly controlled narratives
that then infect the thoughts of many. In these instances,
stories become narratives that champion the individual’s
triumph as opposed to narratives that change the world so
everyone can win. Perhaps more importantly, stories become
narratives that champion the individual’s triumph specifically
at the expense of those who do not win – a process of othering
that has wide-ranging implications. 

In Illness as Metaphor, Susan Sontag notes that ‘modern
totalitarian movements have been peculiarly – and revealingly
– inclined to use disease imagery.’ Thus did we see Donald
Trump tweet on June 19, 2018, that ‘[Democrats] want illegal
immigrants, no matter how bad they may be, to pour into and
infest our Country, like ms-13’ (italics mine). Thus did David
Ward, a former US immigration o!cer, talk on Fox News in
October 2018 of migrants who bring diseases ‘such as smallpox
and leprosy and [tuberculosis] that are going to infect our
people in the United States.’ In this kind of real-world story-
telling, the fear-mongering is focused specifically on the aspect
of disease – and, by extension, disability – as something that
others. To avoid it, we must also avoid the people who are su"er-
ing. Because nobody wants to be other, even by association. In
this way, telling stories – command of the word – often works
to disenfranchise those who are already disenfranchised, further
decreasing their own chances of success and thereby increasing
the continued success of a particular few.

46 | D I S F I G U R E D



Put another way: the medical model celebrates an individ-
ual’s triumph over disability, while the social model celebrates
society’s collective power and responsibility to consider the
needs of all, thus making disability an integrated element of
the society in which we live.

(It should be noted that the social model is not without its
criticism. In particular, recent critiques note that it is not always
possible to improve the social environment so that all aspects
of a disability are accounted for and mitigated. Ramps might
help a wheelchair user into a store, but ramps and accessible
washrooms do not erase pain or fatigue – and the push for
social adjustments that account for certain aspects of a disabil-
ity but not all can often have the e"ect of silencing those who
might speak about their pain or other di!culties but do not,
for fear of seeming to speak against the social model itself.)

Disabled people, along with other marginalized groups,
have long borne the brunt of disenfranchisement in story-
telling, which is why the explosion of social media o"ers such
a powerful opportunity. In demanding the space to tell our
own stories, in advocating for the social model of disability
and for its di"erent ways of viewing the world, disabled people
are taking back control of the narrative, and urging the world
to rethink the idea of the individual triumph, doing the work
of dismantling the narratives that have been told about
disabled people for thousands of years. 

And yet these narratives run so much deeper than we real-
ize. Like the thorns that grew to submerge Sleeping Beauty’s
castle in the Disney film, their roots run gnarled paths far
below the ground. To understand how the medical and social
models of disability function in the world of our everyday,
and how these models and ways of thinking shape the words
that guide countries on a social, political, and structural level,

47



we must also understand how the stories that we’ve told in
the past have worked to entrench the idea of the disabled other
as – at best – an object of pity, and at worst an invisible some-
one, barely there at all. 

In Care Work, author and disability activist Leah Lakshmi
Piepzna-Samarasinha explores the rise of disability justice
against the specific concerns and experiences of Black, poc,
and queer disability politics. In looking specifically at disabled
ibpoc survivor narratives, Piepzna-Samarasinha raises the
spectre that haunts most of the fairy tales we know – this
question of there being only two ways for a story to end.
‘[S]omething terrible and murky happens in a bedroom,’ they
write, ‘there’s a lot of darkness, and then the sun comes out,
you speak to a nice therapist in a pastel o!ce for six sessions,
and then you’re fixed, you marry your husband or get a girl-
friend and have a kid, and it’s all pastel soft lighting fade out
forever. You either do that or you’re fucked – you abuse your
kids, and you die a horrible death. Those are the two options
in the back of folks’ heads.’ 

These two options – happiness forever or terrible tragedy
and sadness until death – sit in the backs of our heads in many
ways because of the stories we’ve all been told as children.
Happy endings are happy precisely because they have no dark-
ness – unhappy endings, conversely, are that way because of
a total absence of happiness and light. 

For many able-bodied people in the world today, the idea
of disability comes shrouded in darkness. It is inconceivable
to so many that someone could be disabled and also happy,
because we as social beings have been taught, through the
books we read and the films and television we watch and the
music we listen to, the stories we tell one another, that to be

48 | D I S F I G U R E D



disabled is to be at a disadvantage: to be a lesser body, to be a
body that cannot function at the same level as other bodies in
society. To be disabled is to be in pain, physically and psycho-
logically, emotionally and spiritually – and what possible
goodness can be found in pain? What sort of happy ending
can be found in constant struggle? 

(And yet society also parrots an accompanying surface
truth: that we are all individuals, that we all have di"erent
ways of being in the world. Of course life isn’t all happy endings,
society says – while simultaneously venerating happiness and
joy and shying away from struggle and pain. Of course the
larger world believes – in an intellectual, thought-exercise kind
of way – that it is possible to be happy and also disabled –
until that same larger world is faced with the specific complex-
ities of what it means to occupy the disabled body. Of course
society can expand and grow and change to account for bodies
of all types – until that body is seen as unreasonable, or
demanding, or wanting ‘special treatment,’ in which case the
world falls back on the ableism that has underpinned our stories
for centuries, and lets out a resounding cry of that’s unfair. 

It’s unfair that disabled people get special treatment. It’s
unfair that disabled people get to park closer, or that disabled
people get discounts, or that disabled people are allowed to
bring their service animals into a restaurant. It’s unfair that
disabled people get to stay at home while other people have to
go out and work!)

Often, the medical and social models of disability embody
this happy/unhappy dichotomy – and depending on where
you’re standing, the question of which model represents the
happy ending is open to interpretation. Proponents of the
medical model see the disabled life as an unhappy ending
because the medical model can fix it; proponents of the social

49



model see the prospect of a cure as an unhappy ending
because it removes the responsibility of bettering the social
environment from society at large and places the onus on
the individual to transform, thus eradicating the physical
differences and accompanying memories that so often tether
the disabled person’s experience of the world.

Who would I be, for example, if I hadn’t been born the girl
with the cyst in her brain? My experiences at the hospital and
with surgeries, with the wheelchair and my crutches, with my
limp and the eventual bullying that came about as a result of
all of this – these experiences have shaped me, have made me
who I am. Had I been born without that cyst, I would have a
di"erent life now. I would not be who I am today. 

In Disability Theory, Siebers advances a theory of what he
terms complex embodiment, wherein elements of both the
medical model and the social model guide how the body makes
its way through the world. ‘The theory of complex embodi-
ment,’ he writes, ‘raises awareness of the e"ects of disabling
environments on people’s lived experience of the body, but it
emphasizes as well that some factors a"ecting disability, such
as chronic pain, secondary health e"ects, and aging, derive
from the body.’ 

In e"ect, it is possible to be disabled both by society and
by pain; to struggle both as a result of the overwhelming bias
in favour of the able body and as a result of the unique nature
of one’s own body and its di"erent challenges in the world.
Disability and able-bodiedness are both merely points on an
enormous spectrum of human variation, and the work of being
in the world at all entails being on this spectrum in some way,
shape, or form. 

It is not hard to travel from this reality of a spectrum of
disability through to a subsequent spectrum of happiness,

50 | D I S F I G U R E D



where it is possible to recognize happiness, like ability and
disability, as a malleable, changeable quality that doesn’t exist
in static form. Just as it is possible to move from ability to
disability – and also possible, through innovations both
medical and social, to move from disability to ability and back
again – so too is it possible (and, in fact, more realistic) to
move from happiness to unhappiness and back again, over
and over, as we move through life. 

We mustn’t tell this to the princess, however. Who is she
if she can’t walk down the aisle to meet her prince? 

In the Brothers Grimm’s ‘The Maiden Without Hands,’ a miller
is visited by the Devil, disguised as an old man, who promises
the miller riches in exchange for whatever lies beyond his
mill. The miller, thinking the Devil means an old apple tree,
gladly makes the bargain; it is only when he returns home to
his wife, who is overjoyed at the jewels and money that now
overflow their cupboards, that he discovers the truth: his
daughter, beautiful and pious, was standing on the other side
of the mill when the Devil struck his bargain. 

In three years, the Devil returns to claim the maiden. First
she draws a circle round herself and purifies it with water so
he can’t get to her; then, when the Devil angrily instructs the
father to rid the house of water so she can’t purify herself
anymore, she weeps onto her hands and purifies them with
her tears. 

‘Chop o" her hands!’ the Devil instructs, and the father,
terrified, does as he is told. 

But the maiden weeps over her stumps, purifying them
once again, and the Devil retreats in defeat. The father, now a
rich man, promises to look after his daughter for the rest of
her life, but she refuses to stay. Instead, she instructs her father

51



to tie her severed hands to her back and casts herself out onto
the mercy of the world. 

She comes to a kingdom, and a royal garden. Suffering
from hunger, she falls to her knees and cries aloud to God;
an angel appears and lets her into the garden, then brings
her fruit from the trees. But she is discovered, and the angel
vanishes. Thinking she’s a thief, the soldiers throw her in
the dungeon.

She is rescued by the king, who falls in love with her and
brings her out of the dungeon. When they marry, the king
gives her a pair of silver hands that she learns to use in place of
her real ones. But the Devil, still angry at his thwarted attempt
to take her, isn’t finished. A year after their marriage, the king
goes away to war and the Maiden Without Hands, now queen,
gives birth to a son; the Devil intercepts the messenger who is
bringing this news to the king and gives him a message to say
that the queen has given birth to a changeling. The king reads
the fake message and is distressed, but still loves his wife – he
instructs the messenger to go back and tell the kingdom that
his wife and the child must be protected. 

But the Devil intercepts the message again, and the
messenger brings back a falsified edict, purportedly from the
king, that the queen and the child are to be killed. The king’s
old mother helps them both escape from the castle, and the
Maiden Without Hands finds herself wandering the world
again, this time with her child. 

They come to a hut in the forest; an angel appears to
them and tells the queen that she may stay there, untroubled.
They live here for fourteen years until the king – who spent
the first seven years fighting on the battlefield and then,
having learned of the Devil’s treachery, the last seven years
searching the wilderness for his family – finally finds them

52 | D I S F I G U R E D



again. They return to the kingdom and live happily for the
rest of their days.

The queen’s hands have grown back in the interim, as hands
in fairy tales are wont to do if you pray hard enough. 

Changeling, in itself, is an interesting term. Historically, the
idea of a changeling child has been inextricably tied up with
magic; in Irish folklore, changelings were thought to be the
children of fairies who’d been swapped in for healthy human
children. Fairy children were considered to be sickly, and it was
often expected that they wouldn’t live long; families would
leave their ‘changeling’ children out to die in the cold as a result,
convinced that their actual child was lost to them forever. 

The belief was held that fairies swapped out human children
for any number of reasons: for companionship, out of revenge,
to have a human child as a servant. Usually, the suspicion that
a child was a changeling arose right at birth; but in some cases,
the question didn’t come up until years later. In 1826 an Irish
woman drowned a three-year-old boy in her care in the River
Flesk because he couldn’t speak or walk and she was trying to
get ‘the changeling out of him’; in 1895 the Irishwoman Bridget
Cleary was killed by her husband and relatives after a short
illness, with the husband invoking what became infamous as
the ‘fairy defence.’ 

Tellingly, the question of whether a child was a changeling
or not was directly tied to whether the child showcased visible
disabilities at birth – or, in cases of later development, whether
the child/young person exhibited behaviour that was thought
at the time to be incomprehensible or strange. Nineteenth-
century beliefs posited that autistic children were the product
of fairies – the belief that fairies themselves spent long amounts
of time completing repetitive tasks like counting gold coins

53



echoes documented elements of autistic behaviour. (If there is
no worldly explanation, there is most assuredly a magical one.) 

Consider them, for a moment. A child born with a caul, a
boy with a club foot, a girl with spina bifida, left outside to
shiver and cry until they are no more. A child three centuries
ago, born with cerebral palsy, though no one yet knows what
it is, only that the child can’t eat or speak or roll over. Grief-
stricken parents who curse the fairies and leave the child
outside to die of starvation or exposure. Children who aren’t
magical, but only di"erent. 

How many children have we lost to the cold and snow
over the centuries – children born not to a king and queen but
to common people, mothers and fathers with no knowledge
of the world apart from the stories they’ve told themselves at
night before their fires? How many lives have been smothered
or disappeared or haven’t been allowed to flourish because of
the stories we tell? 

‘The Maiden Without Hands,’ notes Ann Schmiesing, stands
in stark opposition to a tale like ‘Hans My Hedgehog,’ precisely
because the maiden is meek and subservient, where Hans My
Hedgehog is a vocal activist in his own life. The maiden is
ready and willing to cast herself into the world, to believe that
society will meet all of her needs, whereas Hans My Hedgehog
is instead focused on proving himself within the confines of
the system. In contrast to Hans My Hedgehog’s rage and advo-
cacy, the Maiden’s faith is as much an undercurrent throughout
the tale as is her amputation.

It’s tempting to think that ‘The Maiden Without Hands’
espouses the social model of disability, wherein disabled
individuals operate within the world as a result of a society
that takes care of their needs. But, in reality, this fairy tale

54 | D I S F I G U R E D



operates squarely within the realm of the disabled charity
trope, which many if not all modern disabled people recognize
in some form or another. 

The charity model shares similarities with the medical
model of disability in that the disabled person is once again
seen as a flaw – as someone in possession of a less-than-
perfect body, a disfigured body, someone who is set apart from
society as a result of these di"erences. In each case, the disabled
person is at the mercy of others – in the medical model, medical
professionals are the experts who can help the disabled indi-
vidual and ultimately, hopefully, eradicate the disability; in
the charity model, the disabled person is someone to be pitied
and saved by both the medical and social establishments. The
medical world will work to cure the physical, while the social
world will work to improve the life of the disabled person
through charity and magnanimous good deeds. 

The charity model, as noted by the online resource Disabled
World, ‘[d]epicts disabled people as victims of circumstance
who are deserving of pity.’ It relies on the time-honoured tradi-
tion of noblesse oblige (where those with means – literally, the
‘nobles’ – are obligated to improve society by giving back and
sharing their wealth), but instead of the rich giving to the
poor, the able-bodied are posited as those who instead deign
to help the disabled. Yet while the idea of being charitable
certainly seems like a nice thing to aspire to – the philanthro-
pist is inevitably seen as a more morally acceptable figure
than Ebenezer Scrooge – it’s worth noting that charity also
functions as a way of reinforcing existing social structures. As
long as individual people are charitable, as long as individual
charities and charitable actions exist to make gestures toward
those who are less fortunate, there is less need for the sweeping
societal change that would do away with the hierarchies and

55



gross economic and structural inequalities that disadvantage
people in the first place. Essentially, the existence of charity,
by making concern for one’s fellow humans less a responsibility
and more an active choice, works to undermine the eradication
of poverty and injustice. 

(I am not, of course, arguing against the presence of
charities – I think charities can and do accomplish wonder-
ful things. It’s good to encourage people to think of ways
they can give to the world, and especially to think of how
they might consider those less fortunate; the key is that we
need to stop thinking of those less fortunate as being so
because of some specific circumstance [disability, say] and
more because of structural inequalities that the ‘more fortu-
nate’ continue to uphold no matter how much money they
give away.) 

In Illness as Metaphor, Susan Sontag notes that disease has
often been associated with moral failings. 

Psychological theories of illness are a powerful means of
placing the blame on the ill. Patients who are instructed
that they have, unwittingly, caused their disease are also
being made to feel that they have deserved it … Nothing
is more punitive than to give a disease a meaning – that
meaning invariably being a moralistic one.

In literature, this has also been the case with disability. In the
same way that su"erers of a disease become poster children
for the ravages of the disease itself (tb, cancer, aids), disabled
people become iterations of loss, of struggle, of the ways in
which the world is not kind to those who are di"erent. And in
the same way that disease, for Sontag, then becomes a
metaphor – something is a cancer, something spreads like the

56 | D I S F I G U R E D



plague – so too does disability often become emblematic of
these time-worn but still somehow newly urgent fears: loss
of independence, social ostracization, loneliness in an increas-
ingly connected world.

And in the same way that the medical model places the
fault of disability at the body of the disabled person and lifts
the medical professional up as the ‘expert,’ in the same way
that the charity model removes the blame for society from
the shoulders of the magnanimous philanthropist and rein-
forces hierarchical norms, psychological theories of illness lift
the blame and responsibility for illness from the shoulders of
society and place it squarely within the fault of the patient. If
one had only refrained from some behaviour or practised
others or been more devout or had more faith, the illness
might have been avoided. (In the nineteenth and early- to
mid-twentieth centuries, it was believed in some circles that
melancholy patients might have avoided cancer if they had
been happier; in the eighteenth century, those who were deli-
cate and high-strung and prone to fits of excitability and high
emotion might have avoided tuberculosis by practising a
calmer, quieter kind of life.)

This sort of thinking sounds ridiculous now – except that
when it comes to disability, it’s often still engaged in, albeit in
subtler (and arguably more damaging) ways. Disabled people
are still brought to faith healers; they are told to drink more
water or drink green tea or do detoxes or try hypnosis to remove
barriers of the mind as a way of overcoming physical impair-
ments. Disabled people are encouraged to ‘push through’ and
‘exercise’ and are reminded over and over again that the only
disability is a bad attitude. 

And when disabled people do manage to ‘push through’
in whatever way the able-bodied society sees fit, they are

57



lauded as examples for all, as people who have refused to let
themselves be ‘confined’ by their physical limitations in much
the same way as people are spoken of as being ‘confined’ to 
a wheelchair.

Look at what you’ve overcome, society says. You’re such an
inspiration.

Inspiration porn, a phrase coined by the late Australian
disability activist Stella Young in 2012, refers to the portrayal
of disabled people as inspirational precisely because of their
disability. Inspiration porn goes hand in hand with the idea
of the disabled body as less. If a disabled body is seen as
less, then what that body can achieve is also less – and yet
somehow, paradoxically, more: more difficult, more noble,
more special. 

In an April 2019 article for Bustle, Imani Barbarin recounts
going to a ballet class when she was seven. ‘I wanted to develop
art,’ she wrote, ‘but the teachers just wanted me to be seen. I
wanted to be challenged, but no one challenges those born
with “challenges.”‘ Thus does the less of the disabled body
become more in the eyes of the able-bodied world. The disabled
body cannot meet the same bar as the body that is not disabled,
and so the bar is lowered. When the disabled person meets
the expectations of this new, lowered bar, they are cheered
and congratulated.

You want to dance, but you have cerebral palsy and you’ll
never be a prima ballerina. So instead of creating a dance that
responds specifically to the needs of your own body, you’re
given token representation and told you should be happy with
being able to do this much.

Look at you, meeting this much lower bar. Look at you,
trying to be like able-bodied people. That’s more than enough
– that’s inspiring. 

58 | D I S F I G U R E D



As with the charity model, psychological approaches to
disability work to take the blame away from society and put it
on the individual – to make disability not a lived, mundane
reality but a temporary struggle that can be overcome if one
has the inner and outer strength to do it. (The corollary here
is that those who do not ‘overcome’ their disabilities – or fail
to appreciate the so-called ‘accomplishments’ they make in
the world of the disabled body’s lowered bar – fail because of
their own lack of strength or e"ort.)

Your disability is causing you pain? Do yoga. Struggling
because of mental health issues? Meditate. The more you
focus, the more you’ll improve, and the less society at large
needs to worry about having di"erent kinds of dance classes
or accessible entryways or accessible bathrooms or clearly
marked accessible parking, to say nothing of captions or asl
or quiet rooms that o"er respite from external stimuli. 

After all, the kingdom didn’t need to change for the Maiden
Without Hands, did it? She got her hands back because of her
faith. (The only disability is a bad attitude.)

She did that all on her own.

I’m six years old when I go back to school after both my
surgeries. Grade 1. There is, as mentioned, a wheelchair, and
a taxi that drives me to school. There is one half of a hexagonal
table that I get to sit at all by myself because my wheelchair
doesn’t fit under the regular desks. There are classmates, again
as mentioned, who are happy to push me around in the school-
yard until they get bored and don’t want to push me anymore.
Sometimes – most times – it is easier to stay inside and read
books, so that’s what I do. 

The cast on my leg begins to smell after a while; bathing is
an ordeal because I am not allowed to get it wet. My mother

59



has to help me because my right leg has to hang out of the tub
at all times. 

After the cast comes o", I work with a physiotherapist
named Eric. He has dark hair and a beard and glasses and he
reminds me of Robert Munsch (author of the beloved Canadian
children’s book The Paper Bag Princess). Or does Robert Munsch
remind me of Eric the physiotherapist? I don’t remember. 

I don’t remember much about this time, to be honest. The
surgery, the two or three years after. 

The memories start a bit later, when my nemesis arrives
in Grade 3.

60 | D I S F I G U R E D