SUBCULTURES AND SOCIOLOGY
GRINNELL COLLEGE

FANDOM AND PARTICIPATORY CULTURE

Home /  Subcultural Theory and Theorists /  Fandom and Participatory Culture

Main Page Theorists Media and Scholarship

FANDOM AND PARTICIPATORY CULTURE

Fan culture, or fandom, is a term which describes communities built around a shared enjoyment of an aspect of popular culture,
such as books, movies, TV shows, bands, sports or sports teams, etc. Fan cultures are examples of participatory cultures.
Participatory cultures involve fans acting not only as consumers but also as producers and creators of some form of creative
media. Though most fan cultures, including sports fans and fans of music groups, have elements of participatory culture, media
fandom in particular encourages creative expression and artistic production by its participants.

Jenkins et al. (2009) define a participatory culture more specifically as one that consists of:

1. Relatively low barriers to artistic expression and civic engagement

2. Strong support for creating and sharing one’s creations with others 

3. Some type of informal mentorship in which the most experienced members pass along their knowledge

to novices

4. Members who believe their contributions matter

5. Members who feel some degree of social connection with one another and care about other members’

opinions about their contributions

In fan cultures, these creations and artistic expressions take the
form of fan fiction, fan art, fan videos, cosplay, filk songs, and
other interactions with a person, group, or fictional universe. Fan
fiction consists of stories written by fans of a particular work of
fiction (rather than the original creator) about the fictional
characters or universe. Fan videos, or fanvids, set clips of a
movie or TV show to music and/or construct a narrative using
clips from multiple source materials. Filk songs are a type of
folk music, usually with science-fiction, fantasy, or other
fictional universes as the subject. Cosplay is the practice of
wearing costumes or other clothing and accessories in an

Fans at an Anime Expo, a fan convention held
attempt to portray a fictional character.

in Los Angeles.
Modern fan culture originated with Star Trek fandom in the
1960s (Helleckson and Busse, 2006). At the time, fans generally
spread their creations through fanzines or conventions. Recently, the Internet has allowed fan culture to become more
widespread and more accessible. Rather than submitting a work of fan fiction to a zine where, if accepted, it would be
photocopied along with other works and sent out to a mailing list, modern fans can post their works online.

Media scholar Henry Jenkins contrasts participatory culture with consumer culture, suggesting that fans “poach” from popular
media, appropriating ideas from the text and rereading them in creative ways for their own uses. One theory of popular culture
holds that the corporate “culture industry” (media producers such as TV networks and film studios) prioritizes profit at the
expense of quality, and that pop culture is a form of hegemony, used to spread dominant ideologies. However, the theory of
participatory culture suggests that rather than being “cultural dupes, social misfits, and mindless consumers,” media fans can be
understood as “active producers and manipulators of meaning” (Jenkins 1992:23). Fan interaction with media becomes a social
activity, and this process allows fans to build their own communities in which they can express themselves. In doing so, they
create spaces where they can critique prescriptive ideas of gender, sexuality, and other norms promoted in part by the media
industry.

Jenkins also theorizes that participatory culture can be a form of resistance. For example, fan fiction, fan videos, and filk songs
often explore themes and aspects of the source material which are of interest to the female-dominated parts of the fan
community, going beyond the stories the male-dominated media industry is interested in or willing to tell. He suggests that
“fandom’s very existence represents a critique of conventional forms of consumer culture” while also providing “a space within
which fans may articulate their specific concerns about sexuality, gender, racism, colonialism, militarism, and forced
conformity” (Jenkins 1992:283). Not only do fans actively generate their own creative material, but they often do so in ways
which critique the media they are consuming.

 

Geek Hierarchies

 

Social hierarchies exist between and within fan
cultures, which can lead to judgment. Members of any
subgroup tend to have a general consensus regarding
which behaviors are acceptable, i.e., which behaviors
constitute true fans or desperate overconformers. This
dynamic is represented in the geek hierarchy. While
members benefit themselves by displaying
commitment, “too strong an investment is threatening
even as that very affect is what centrally defines fans
and geeks”(Busse 2006:79). For example, a Star Trek
fan who goes to a fan convention might consider
herself more geeky than someone whose involvement
with the show ends at watching it, but less geeky than

An excerpt from the geek hierarchy, a flowchart created another Star Trek fan who speaks Klingon (a language
by Lore Sjöberg purporting to delineate the general of one of the show’s alien races). Defining a place for
rankings of what makes a particular type of fan more or oneself in fan culture depends on navigating the fine
less geeky line between professionalism, consumerism, expertise,

and commitment.

 

Fandoms & Identity

Participation in fan culture is often gendered, and a given fan activity’s place in internal hierarchies is often correlated to the
gender of the participants. For example, the vast majority of fanfiction writers are women (Coppa 2013). Generally,
‘transformative’ activities – such as creating fan fiction, fan art, fanvids, etc – are associated with female fans. Conversely,
‘curative’ or ‘affirmational’ activities, such as memorizing trivia or collecting merchandise, tend to be associated with male
fans. Though the two types of fan activity are not mutually exclusive, and though people of all genders engage in any given
form of activity, the gendered stereotypes associated with each type of fandom is reflected in whether those who engage in those
activities are treated as ‘serious’ fans. Henry Jenkins writes that “the largely female composition of media fandom reflects a
historical split within the science fiction fan community between the traditionally male-dominated literary fans and the newer,
more feminine style of media fandom” (1992:48).  This split is reflected in the creative output produced by (primarily female)
fans: fan fiction often brings female experiences into source texts which are generally written by and about men, often
challenging norms of gender and sexuality. In her article on geek hierarchies and gendering, Kristina Busse (2013) delves
further into how gender informs the perceptions of particular fan behaviors. Not only do certain branches of the subculture such
as those engaged in fan fiction become coded unfavorably towards a particular gender, but the way in which media depicts
female fans casts them in a desperate and disgraceful light. Busse describes how the television program Supernatural, whose
fanbase is primarily female, depicts gender bias in its representation of a particular female fan at a convention in episode 5×09.
Rather than granting her character traits such as engagement, curiosity, and commitment, the episode illustrates her as sexually
aggressive and obnoxious towards the show’s male subjects. According to Busse, “this mean-spirited and hateful representation
of female fans seems strange, and yet it suggests the intended viewer’s subject position as clearly not that of a
fangirl”(2013:82).         

 

According to Sarah Gatson and Robin Reid, the
“default fanboy has a presumed race, class, and
sexuality: white, middle-class, male, heterosexual”
(Gatson & Reid 2012). This stereotyped (and often
untrue) profile of fandom participants is applied to
many fandoms, such as the Brony fandom and
science fiction fandom. Why is it that white,
heterosexual males, who arguable have the highest
status in our patriarchal society, voluntarily choose
to lower their social status by participating in
fandoms? Mel Stanfill, in his article, “Doing
Fandom, (Mis)doing Whiteness: The astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti performing a Vulcan
Heteronormativity, Racialization, and the salute while wearing a Star Trek t-shirt.
Discursive Construction of Fandom,” argues that
one of the qualities of fandom participation is that
it is constructed as ultimately “correctable” (Stanfill 2011). The notion of needing to “grow up” is very present in our society,
and this is one lens with which society often uses to view participants of fandoms: they simply need to grow up. Therefore,
especially amongst white participants, fandom is viewed as a safe way to experiment with a new identity while still having the
opportunity to return to the white norms from which they had deviated. Stanfill further states that the overall trend of fans being
portrayed as white in popular culture serve to reinforce that whiteness is the expectation for fans (Stanfill 2011). The stereotype
of fans as white males is frequently inaccurate. In many fandoms, women rather than men make up the majority of fans (as in
the Twilight and The Hunger Games fandoms). In addition, women often make up the majority of a transformative-work-
centered subset of fans even for media aimed at men; for instance, women were the primary drivers of the early Star Trek
fandom, which is generally considered to be the first modern media fandom.  Similarly, many people of color do participate in
fandom; however, except in cases where the original source material is non-Western, the existence and contributions of fans of
color are often less recognized then those of their white counterparts.

 

Fandom as a Consumer Culture

In his work on fan and participatory culture, Matt Hills examines the interplay
between production and the consumerism that fan cultures criticize. Although
fandom has generally bifurcated its participants into “a moral dualism of ‘good’
fandom versus ‘bad’ consumption,” Hills argues for a less divided classification
of fan culture (Hills 2002). Furthermore, several different fan cultures have
turned those who subscribe to traditional workings of capitalism into the other;
people who buy too many items automatically lose authenticity by contributing
to structures that align too strongly with dominant capitalist society, therefore
alienating themselves from supposedly committed fans. Conversely, “we are
presented with the view of fans as (specialist) consumers, whose fandom is
expressed through keeping up with the new release of books, comics, and
videos”(Hills 2002). Therefore, fans must perpetually occupy a space in which
they carve out their own unique identity, separate from conventional
consumerism but also bolster their credibility with particular collectors items.

According to Hills, this negotiation leads to the dichotomy between “use value”
and “exchange value,” or the difference between the symbolic significance and

A rare vintage comic book, one
monetary worth of an object. Although the two concepts seem based in

example of a collectors item that
opposition, Hills argues that they are inherently related and dependent upon one

some fans value as part of their
another. Using the example of the popular children’s fable The Velveteen Rabbit,

authenticity and identity.
he describes a child’s toy that has undergone considerable wear and tear
throughout the years but still holds significance in the eyes of the beholder.
While the rabbit no longer contains merit in its capacity to be traded and

therefore lacks “exchange value”, the child still deems it valuable because of the emotions and recollections attached. However,
Hills then goes on to suggest that fan subculturists must accept such a polarity as an innate contradiction. Instead of “use value”
and “exchange value” existing in stark contrast, the two concepts overlap and inform one another. Due to many objects “being
intensely subjectively valued by fans, such commodities take on a new ‘exchange value’” that is “created through the durability
of fans’ attachments”(Hills 2002). Therefore, participants normally fall somewhere on the spectrum of consumer and producer,
creating monetary value with their overinvestment in specific objects while also forming resistance against the typical trappings
they find in consumerism.   

                 

The Fandom Gift Economy

Tasha Turk has discussed fandom as a “gift economy,” based not on money or on explicit exchanges of goods or services, but on
giving, receiving, and reciprocating. She argues that the process of gift exchange  “is part of what makes it possible to
experience and analyze fandom as a community, or rather an overlapping series of communities, rather than simply a large and
shifting number of people occupying the same affinity space” (Turk 2014). In fandom, Turk argues that the most valued gifts
are those which take time and/or skill to create. The value of those gifts, then, “lies not simply in the content of the gift, nor in
the social gesture of giving, but in the labor that went into their creation” (Turk 2014).

According to Turk, fannish gifts include not only the most visible forms of creative output – fic, art, vids, etc. – but the “wide
range of creative labors that surround and in some cases underlie these art objects” (Turk 2014). These include commenting on
others’ art or writing, volunteering one’s editing skills to help a fanwriter, writing recommendations or reviews, organizing
online challenges or exchanges, editing zines, planning conventions, creating websites for fannish activity, etc. The work which
goes into maintaining the fandom ‘economy’ is related to the formation of fandom as a community: Turk describes fandom as a
system “not just of reciprocal giving but of circular giving” (Turk 2014). Since most of the “gifts” described above are posted
online (or published in a zine), not just sent to a specific person, the entire community (or whichever subset is interested) can be
considered the recipient of the gift.

Turk further relates the concept of “circular giving” to fandom economy by explaining that most fans receive more things than
they produce: most read more fics than they write, or watch fewer vids than they create (Turk 2014). This asymmetry, Turk
argues, is “critical to fandom’s functioning because it balances out the asymmetry in the other direction: not every gift recipient
will reciprocate with ‘the gift of reaction,’” where a reaction might take the form of a comment or a reblog of the work (Turk
2014). This also demonstrates how fans can contribute to the “gift economy,” even if they are not producers, through feedback
and redistribution. From this viewpoint, then, fandom’s gift economy is not just an “accumulation of contiguous reciprocal
relationships between individuals,” but a “complex system in which the reciprocation of gifts, and by extension the reward for
labor, is distributed across the community rather than concentrated in a single transaction” (Turk 2014). This helps explain why
fans choose to participate in the subculture: the value lies not just in the creation of art or writing about their favorite TV show
or movie, but in the consumption of those works by other fans, and the sense of community created when gifts are accepted in
the form of being read, watched, or otherwise appreciated. The concept of fandom’s gift economy has also been explored by
Karen Hellekson.

 

Society’s Perception of Fandom

Joli Jensen  has addressed the role of class and elitism in fan and participatory culture. She argues that because the word “fan”
comes from the word “fanatic,” meaning crazy, there is an “us vs them” divide between fan culture and mainstream society.
Once defined as deviant through their fanaticism, those who are a part of fan cultures become characterized as “disreputable,
even dangerous ‘others’” (Jensen 1992). Jensen describes two characterizations of pathological fans: the “obsessed loner,” who
has been influenced by the media to the point of entering into an “intense fantasy relationship with a celebrity figure” and the
“frenzied fan,” who represents the screaming and crying teenagers in a crowd or the “roaring, maniacal sports fan” rioting at a
game (Jensen 1992). These characterizations ultimately result in stigmatizing fan culture, as the participants are easily
stereotyped. Jensen states that although these stereotypes are not representative of fan culture as a whole, they reveal our beliefs
about modern society and our relationship to it.

Jensen has multiple theories as to the reasons behind the “us vs
them” divide. One theory is the “modernity critique” which
states that due to the perception of modern society as having
loose “communal bonds,” the modern individual is vulnerable
to “irrational appeals” (Jensen 1992). Furthermore, society
views modernity as the increasing role of mass media in our
lives. Those who fall victim to the irrational appeals are
manipulated by mass media to essentially display irrational
loyalties to an aspect of pop culture. The discreditation of
members of fan culture reveals society’s fear of modernity.
They do not like the idea of being taken advantage of by a

Members of the Brony fandom, known in
marketing firm or corporation, so they ostracize those who

particular for attracting stigma and the ‘Us vs
they believe have been.

Them’ divide.
Another theory Jensen describes is the idea that some fans
“use fan culture as a form of ‘psychological compensation,’”
meaning that fans make up for the lack of fulfillment in their lives with intense focus on fictional realities.  However, this
psychological compensation does not apply to all members of fan culture, as there is a difference between those fans who
replace interpersonal relationships with media-audience relationships and those whose participation in fan culture is
supplemental to or aids in making interpersonal relationships. In fact, making interpersonal relationships with those who are a
part of the fan culture also aids in fan culture’s participants’ stigma management. Members of fan culture can refute the
stereotype of the “obsessed loner” and argue that fandom is a social experience, therefore lessening the stigma associated with
fan culture. Even so, in instances of “excessive fandom,” fandoms act as “surrogate relationship[s]” and are often characteristic
of socially isolated members of society (Jensen 1992).  Jensen states that within fan culture, there are fans, fanatics, and
deviants. Whereas fans seek identity and connections with others via a subject, fanatics view the subject as an important aspect
of their identity which is integral to their self-esteem. In contrast, researchers state that fans who they have labeled as “deviants”
have low self-worth and as a result are prone to “role engulfment,” or the tendency to use the deviance related to fandom as a
way to “organize a concept of self” (Jensen 1992). Essentially, Jensen argues that there is a very fine line between being a
“normal fan” and “excessive fandom,” and this line is crossed when the difference between reality and fantasy becomes unclear
(Jensen 1992). Furthermore, this line is constructed, context dependent.

The final reasoning Jensen explains for the “us vs them” divide is that there is an “assumed dichotomy between reason and
emotion” (Jensen 1992). Basically, other members of society can be just as interested in a subject as fans, but the subject and the
approach to it is what differentiates the two. For instance, as Jensen explains, a person who is passionate about an academic
subject can be just as passionate about that subject as a member of fan culture; however, society views academia as a rational
interest held by educated, high class members of society whereas society views fandom as an emotional obsession held by
uneducated low class members of society which is therefore dangerous.

© Fruitful Code, Powered by WordPress

The views and opinions expressed on individual web pages are strictly those of their authors and are not official statements of Grinnell College.
Copyright Statement.