AFRICANFUTURISM:  

An Anthology 
  

Edited by WOLE TALABI 

 
 
 

Featuring Stories by: 

NNEDI OKORAFOR    T.L. HUCHU  

DILMAN DILA     RAFEEAT ALIYU 

TLOTLO TSAMAASE    MAME BOUGOUMA DIENE 

MAZI NWONWU     DEREK LUBANGAKENE  

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

Copyright © 2020 Brittle Paper 

 

 
 

Edited by Wole Talabi 

All rights reserved.  
 
 

These are collected works of fiction. Names, characters, businesses, places, events 
and incidents are either the products of the indicated author·s imagination or used 
in a fictitious manner. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, or actual 

events is purely coincidental. 
 

This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner 
whatsoever without the express written permission of Brittle Paper except for the 

use of brief quotations in a book review or other fair use scenario. 
 

Visit www.brittlepaper.com or Email: info@brittlepaper.com 

  
 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

 Introduction by Wole Talabi  

 Africanfuturism Defined by Nnedi Okorafor  

1 Egoli by T.L. Huchu 1 

2 Sunrise by Nnedi Okorafor 8 

3 Yat Madit by Dilman Dila 16 

4 Rainmaker by Mazi Nwonwu 29 

5 Behind Our Irises by Tlotlo Tsamaase 42 

6 Fort Kwame by Derek Lubangakene 52 

7 Fruit of the Calabash by Rafeeat Aliyu 65 

8 Lekki Lekki by Mame Bougouma Diene 75 

 About The Authors  

 About The Editor  

 About BrittlePaper  

   

 



 

For all the lovers of African literature. See you in the future. 

 



 

 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 

By 
 

Wole Talabi 
 
 

I·ve read a lot of science fiction. Award-winning epics, sweeping space 
operas, philosophical considerations of the human condition, wonderful 
alternate histories, spectacular visions of the future, so many stories that 
took me to the edge of space, time and imagination, but in most of them, 
there was hardly a mention of Africa or Africans or even specific African 
ways of thinking. And when I say ¶African·, I mean African, not African-
American or the larger African diaspora. Not that I want to draw lines and 
make distinctions, I·d prefer not to, but the lines exist and thus must be 
acknowledged. In fact, they already have. This brings us to Afrofuturism. 

Mark Dery in Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R Delany, Greg Tate 
and Tricia Rose wrote, ´Speculative Fiction that addresses African²American 
themes and addresses African²American concerns in the context of 
twentieth-century technoculture³and, more generally, African²American 
signification that appropriates images of technology and a prosthetically 
enhanced future³might, for want of a better term, be called 
¶Afrofuturism·. 

There are issues with this term and while I will not dwell on them here, 
as they have already been extensively explored by academics, critics, readers 
and authors, I believe the lens through which the term was first conceived 
are obvious. This is evidenced by the fact that since its introduction into the 
general literary language in 1993, the meanings of Afrofuturism have been 
revised, reviewed, reconsidered, leading to iterations such as Afrofuturism 

 



 

2.0 and Afrofuturism 3.0.  
But few people are as aware of the power of words as authors.  
In 2018, Mohale Mashigo·s essay AfrofXWXrism: A\ashis· AmaWeki which 

serves as the preface to her collection of short stories, Intruders, stated: ´I 
believe Africans, living in Africa, need something entirely different from 
Afrofuturism. I·m not going to coin a phrase but please feel free to do so.µ 

In many African musical traditions, where there is a call, there is a 
response and I like to imagine that there was some larger music at play here 
because in 2019, Nnedi Okorafor published a statement on her blog called 
Africanfuturism Defined (reprinted in this anthology) in which she writes, 
´Africanfuturism is similar to ¶Afrofuturism· in the way that blacks on the 
continent and in the Black Diaspora are all connected by blood, spirit, 
history and future. The difference is that Africanfuturism is specifically and 
more directly rooted in African culture, history, mythology and point-of-
view as it then branches into the Black Diaspora, and it does not privilege 
or center the West. Africanfuturism is concerned with visions of the future, 
is interested in technology, leaves the earth, skews optimistic, is centered on 
and predominantly written by people of African descent (black people) and 
it is rooted first and foremost in Africa.µ  

This is an interesting working definition with which I believe she was 
trying to refocus the lens through which her work (and the work of several 
other African authors) was being seen. And it is working. While 
Africanfuturism can be seen by some as a subset of certain expanded 
definitions of Afrofuturism, it is largely its own term. Africanfuturist stories 
going as far back as the history of the genre can (and should) now be clearly 
seen and read through a lens that centres them and their viewpoints, 
encouraging readers around the world to actively engage with African 
traditions of thought, of science, of philosophy, of history, of dreams, of 
being. I believe there is value in this focus, in this clarity. 

While others in the many black speculative arts have been using similar 
terms including the distinct ´African Futurismµ (two words) to say similar 
things, by staking claim and giving definition to this term, Africanfuturism, 
there is now an anchor point, a clearer signpost for about what many 
African authors are trying to do when they write certain kinds of science 
fiction ² not just from Africa, or set in Africa, but about Africa. 

And so, here is this anthology, composed of 8 original visions of 
Africanfuturism: science fiction stories focused on the African experience 
and hopes and fears, exploring African sciences, philosophies and 
adaptations to technology and visions of the future centred on, or spiralling 
out of, Africa. They cover a wide range of science fiction sub-genres, tones 
and styles, from the mundane to the operatic, but they all, I believe, capture 
the essence of what we talk about when we talk about Africanfuturism. 

I hope you enjoy them.

 



 

 
 

AFRICANFUTURISM DEFINED 
 

By 
 

Nnedi Okorafor 
 

 
I started using the term Africanfuturism (a term I coined) because I 

felt«  
 

1. The term Afrofuturism had several definitions and some of the 
most prominent ones didn't describe what I was doing.   
 

2. I was being called this word [an Afrofuturist] whether I agreed or 
not (no matter how much I publicly resisted it) and because most 
definitions were off, my work was therefore being read wrongly.   
 

3. I needed to regain control of how I was being defined.  
 

For a while I tried to embrace the term (which is why I used it in my TED 
Talk), but over a year ago, I realized that was not working. So here goes:  

I am an Africanfuturist and an Africanjujuist.  
Africanfuturism is a sub-category of science fiction. Africanjujuism is a 

subcategory of fantasy that respectfully acknowledges the seamless blend of 
true existing African spiritualities and cosmologies with the imaginative. 

 
Reminder: Africa is not a country, it's a diverse continent. I'm also aware 

 



 

that it's a construct (and an ethereal thing who travels across space and 
time); I'm just rolling with it.  

 
Africanfuturism is similar to ¶Afrofuturism· in the way that blacks on the 

continent and in the Black Diaspora are all connected by blood, spirit, 
history and future. The difference is that Africanfuturism is specifically and 
more directly rooted in African culture, history, mythology and point-of-
view as it then branches into the Black Diaspora, and it does not privilege 
or center the West.  

Africanfuturism is concerned with visions of the future, is interested in 
technology, leaves the earth, skews optimistic, is centered on and 
predominantly written by people of African descent (black people) and it is 
rooted first and foremost in Africa. It·s less concerned with ´what could 
have beenµ and more concerned with ´what is and can/will beµ. It 
acknowledges, grapples with and carries ´what has beenµ. 

Africanfuturism does not have to extend beyond the continent of Africa, 
though often it does. Its default is non-western; its default/center is 
African. This is distinctly different from ¶Afrofuturism· (The word itself was 
coined by Mark Dery and his definition positioned African American 
themes and concerns at the definition·s center. Note that in this case, I am 
defining ¶African Americans· as those who are direct descendants of the 
stolen and enslaved Africans of the transatlantic slave trade).  

 
An example:  
Afrofuturism: Wakanda builds its first outpost in Oakland, CA, USA.   
Africanfuturism: Wakanda builds its first outpost in a neighboring 

African country.  
 
If you want further explanation, you won·t get it from me. Of this, I am 

not a scholar, I am a writer, a creative. This is as far as I will go on the 
subject. I hope what I have written here gives some clarity. The last thing I 
will say on this is that Africanfuturism is rooted in Africa and then it 
branches out to embrace all blacks of the Diaspora, this includes the 
Caribbean, South American, North American, Asia, Europe, 
Australia...wherever we are. It's global.  

I revel on one of the branches, being Naijamerican (Nigerian-American), 
a Diasporan. One need only look at my work, my road to writing science 
fiction and my inspirations to understand why I felt the needed to create 
this word and category.  

My middle name is Nkemdili, which means ´Let mine be mineµ. This 
was inevitable, LOL.  

 
Other non-central points: Africanfuturism does not include fantasy 

 



 

unless that fantasy is set in the future or involves technology or space travel, 
etc...which would make such a narrative more science fiction than fantasy. 
There are grey areas, blends, and contradictions, as there are with any 
definition. Some works are both Africanfuturist and Afrofuturist, 
depending on how they are read.  

Africanfuturism (being African-based) will tend to naturally have 
mystical elements (drawn or grown from actual African cultural 
beliefs/worldviews, not something merely made up).  Lastly, 
Africanfuturism is spelled as one word (not two) and the ´fµ 
is not capitalized. It is one word so that the concepts of Africa and futurism 
cannot be separated (or replaced with something else) because they both 
blend to create something new (just like the word ´Naijamericanµ). As one 
word, it is one thing and no one can change the subject without starting a 
different conversation. 

 
And there it is.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Nnedimma Nkemdili Okorafor, a.k.a. Nnedi

 



 

 
 
 
 
 

FRUIT OF THE CALABASH 
 

By 
 

Rafeeat Aliyu 
 
Morning met Maseso awake. There were nights when she couldn·t sleep, 

after spending hours in her lab fertilising ova, and nurturing her stars 
carefully« carefully. This was what she did for a living that had paved her 
way from the drab corridors and rooms of the National Hospital in the 
business district to the cushy section in upscale Maitama where she now ran 
her own private practice, nestled between grand embassy buildings and 5-
star hotels. Maseso usually enjoyed her job but recently, anxiety prevented 
her from sleeping. She was a woman who stubbornly maintained her 
routines, and so she laid on her bed fully awake. From time to time, she 
would sit up and shift the curtains aside to stare at the neighbouring duplex 
that housed her lab. When she wasn·t doing that, she checked the lab 
camera feeds on her tablet, slowly counting the hours until 5:45am when 
she would be back in the room where she kept her stars.  

At the hospital it was mandatory to refer to the unborn beings growing 
in the globular outer shells as ¶babies·. Most other labs simply used ¶foetus· 
but at Maseso·s the preferred term was ¶star·.  

Her hands trembled as she keyed in the code to unlock the front door 
and disabled the security system. As she entered trepidation filled her, an 
intuitive warning that something was wrong. Stepping into the calabash 
room, Maseso instantly knew her fears were realized. It had already 
happened. She knew it, but she took her time, hoping she was wrong.  

Stretched out in front of her were two rows of twenty calabashes ³ 
artificial wombs labelled as such due to their gourd-like shape ³ sixteen of 
them containing one star each. Maseso approached the first one, Koso, 
taking note of its vitals, growth progress and the nutrient levels of the 
amniotic solution. There was a running joke at the National Hospital where 
they would add to check for extra arms or a tail growing where it wasn·t 

65 



 

supposed to. Smiling wryly at the memory, Maseso progressed as she 
normally would. Up next was Po Tolo     , she looked at its vitals and 
checked nutrition levels, everything was fine.  

Inhaling deeply Maseso continued her routine, moving from one gourd-
like womb to another, and as she went further down the room, her breaths 
grew shorter. She just knew. Even before she got to the back of the room 
where Xamidimura should be and she saw it almost fully formed lying on 
the tiled floor. It was still and breathless, skin grey, lips purple, open eyes a 
strange, consuming black. The sound of Maseso·s heart pounding loudly in 
her chest joined the hum of the machines and the bubbling of solutions. 
Her hands lifted to cover her mouth as she retreated backward and quietly 
closed the door behind her. Falling to her knees in the hallway, she 
struggled to breathe. She was frightened not just by what she had seen but 
by its implications.  

The service that Maseso offered was a convenience for those who could 
afford it. Decades after increased infertility across the globe due to 
endocrine-disruptors, the solution came in the form of full ectogenesis, 
often with artificial gametes from stem cells. Nigeria took a different 
approach buying as much ova as possible from the dwindling numbers of 
fertile women.      The culture demanded procreation enough to welcome 
ectogenesis but still held on to ideas of what was ´naturalµ and accepted. 
The National Hospital was initially the only place couples with the means 
could turn to for a child but there was a waiting list that stretched through 
years. They quickly grew overwhelmed and soon private outfits started 
popping up. Maseso spent fifteen years saving, moving certain names up 
the waiting lists and collecting tokens of appreciation in her private bank 
account before quitting to set up her own lab. Heavenly Babies and 
Mothers was registered and licensed to store gametes, grow endometrium 
cells, implant embryos in lab tissue and a host of other reproductive 
industry services.  

It was with a sense of pride that Maseso created every new life but 
Xamidimura, the one that now lay on her lab floor with cold and unstaring 
eyes, had given her problems from the get-go. This was supposed to be the 
child of a wealthy family, the kind with billions in several currencies tucked 
in offshore accounts. Maseso was doubly frustrated that this particular star 
had failed for a second time, carrying implications for the future of her 
business. The last time Senator Idris and Hajia Maimuna had come to her 
office, there had been an outburst. It was mostly the Senator doing the 
screaming. 

´You told us that there was a 99.9% chance of our baby being born safe 
and healthy. We have seen other babies who were born in your lab so 
why« why is it our own that keeps on facing these problems? Are you 
deliberately wasting our money? Do I look like a bank?µ    

66 



 

´No, please understand.µ Maseso had objected. She kept her voice calm 
and steely, used to dealing with irate clients from her years at the hospital. 
´Everything was perfect, as it should be. I can assure you that we at 
Heavenly Babies and Mothers³µ 

´Rubbish! This is the second time, this son that I am supposed to have 
hasn·t come.µ  

At that point, Maimuna began shedding silent tears so Maseso turned 
her attention to her. 

´Hajia please understand, sometimes cases like this come up.µ 
´You must do something!µ Idris boomed. ´It·s your lab, it·s your 

machine. My wife is infertile! How are we going to continue our family 
line?µ  

Maseso was rendered speechless. The Senator went on, raining down 
more curses with each sentence he spewed until his words turned 
threatening. 

´If we don·t leave here without a child, I swear,µ he touched his tongue 
and pointed to the sky, ´your business will be destroyed.µ 

The hairs on Maseso·s arms rose when she recalled those words. As they 
left her office that day, Maseso knew that if her next attempt failed, she was 
done for. If Xamidimura was no more, so was her business. She would lose 
everything, even her life maybe. Her legacy, her work, her other stars« 
everything she had struggled to build would vanish before her eyes. Maseso 
shuddered to imagine life outside the protected zones where violence and 
poverty were rampant as the government and businesses focused their 
attention on locations with children.  

Maseso retreated to her office at the front of the building, sat down and 
made herself a cup of coffee. The hour that passed felt like a minute when 
Ego bounced into the office, her beaded braids swinging and clicking with 
every step. She didn·t appreciate her assistant·s flamboyant style, but Ego 
came highly recommended when the assistant she had poached from the 
hospital had to leave Abuja. While she was capable, Ego·s behaviour often 
irritated Maseso. She entered the office and her bubbly, colorful appearance 
contrasted starkly against the pristine monochrome of the office. 

´Good morning doctor, how are you?µ Ego didn·t wait for a response 
before continuing. ´You won·t believe what happened yesterday; me and 
my friends went to this party and can you imagine one of those kids selling 
drugs, the ones they claim can get you pregnant right, he came up to me 
and he was trying to chat me up.µ 

Ego chattered on, not caring that Maseso was staring blankly down at 
her still full cup. Ego had made herself comfortable on her desk before she 
noticed. 

´Dr. M are you okay?µ 
Maseso couldn·t say a word, she just pointed in the direction of the lab. 

67 



 

Ego had a slight frown on her face as she left for the calabash room. Barely 
a minute later, she rushed back into the office. 

´It·s the Senator·s child isn·t it?µ 
Maseso nodded. ´I don·t know what to do.µ 
Ego scoffed. ´Ha! I knew it! It·s that his juju. It·s reached this lab; we 

should·ve never taken him. I told you my Aunt warned me when we saw 
the forums online.µ  

´Don·t even start that,µ Maseso said, flicking her hand in dismissal. She 
found it odd the way Ego could retain superstition in her mind while 
working in the field of reproductive sciences. She was always talking about 
dark magic, even at the oddest moments. She·d told Maseso during a 
routine fertilization that online gossip was that the Senator had made an evil 
pact with a water spirit, exchanging his firstborn child for wealth and status. 

´I·m telling you!µ Ego insisted. 
At that Maseso rolled her eyes. ´I should have listened to you I guess 

but it·s too late.µ 
´No, it·s not too late,µ Ego laughed. ´Come help me, let·s put that baby 

in the incubator.µ  
´That will be pointless,µ Maseso said, shuddering. She had no intention 

of touching it.  
But she followed Ego into the calabash room. Both women looked 

down at the unmoving form that could have been a doll. Xamidimura was a 
star that didn·t get the chance to be fully born into this world. Maseso had 
been so close and now, all her efforts had gone to dust. Her stomach 
heaved, causing Maseso to cover her mouth with both hands. Ego 
efficiently tossed a scarf over the dead star, the colourful piece of fabric 
jarring against the still greys and chromes of the room. She wrapped 
Xamidimura and went upstairs to the incubation room. When she returned, 
Maseso was back in the front office. 

´Contact the Senator,µ Maseso directed. ´The sooner we get this over 
with, the better.µ 

´No,µ Ego said. ´My Aunt will be able to help us.µ 
Maseso frowned. ´What do you mean?µ  
´Juju for juju.µ Ego replied. ´We·ll get her to come and do something, 

my Aunt is powerful in that.µ 
´Seriously?µ Maseso clicked her tongue. 
´You really want your business to end, eh? I guess you·re not that 

desperate then!µ Ego took her seat. 
´I have told you never to³µ Maseso was interrupted by a low 

thrumming that sounded through the entire building. A call was coming in. 
Ego accepted the call with a flick of her wrist and greeted. ´Good 

morning, ma.µ 
´Good morning,µ the young Maimuna·s voice surrounded them. ´How 

68 



 

are you? Is business going well? How about doctor?µ 
The usual greetings felt torturous as she trailed towards the issue at 

hand. 
´I·m calling to confirm my bonding time.µ 
´Bonding time,µ Maseso was surprised at the hoarseness in her own 

voice. It was pointless to do so but she found herself reaching for her table 
to check the cameras positioned around the outside of the building, as 
though Hajia Maimuna would be there already. 

´Yes,µ the woman sounded unsure. ´It is supposed to be tomorrow. Is 
everything fine?µ 

As Maseso struggled for words to say, she was struck with the absurd 
feeling that Maimuna knew something. Even in an external womb, bonds 
could be formed, there were even reports of women·s abdomens swelling in 
time with the growth of their foetuses. Two years ago, Hajia·s tears had 
irked Maseso as they consulted with her. It was their first failure, still 
marginally possible but not unique. Maimuna had shouted things about not 
wanting to try again, lamenting the stress of getting her hopes up only to 
have them dashed and Maseso wanted to grab her by her slender shoulders 
and shake her. Outside there were women begging for even a chance to 
have their own baby. In the past weeks, Maimuna grudgingly sang and read 
to Xamidimura during bond times. 

´Everything is fine,µ Ego chimed in. The frown on Maseso·s face 
deepened, her assistant was so insolent.  

´Hajia, there·s something I would like to discuss with you tomorrow,µ 
Maseso said firmly. 

´Okay,µ there was a lilt in Maimuna·s voice that made the word sound 
like a question. 

´See you tomorrow,µ Maseso clicked her fingers, putting an end to the 
call before Maimuna asked for details or Ego said something unexpected 
again. 

Her assistant pouted. ´What will you tell her?µ 
´The truth!µ Maseso stood up and walked to the window, looking up at 

the blue, cloudless sky. 
´Ah! But I thought you said senator juju threatened to shut this place 

down last time.µ 
´Yes, he did. And if that·s what he chooses to do, then so be it,µ Maseso 

gritted her teeth.  
 
She didn·t really mean it of course. Barely an hour later, Maseso asked 

the younger woman to mind the lab while she went out. Her destination 
was Jabi where one of her former colleagues from the National Hospital 
had set up a private lab like hers. It required leaving Maitama which meant 
wasting time at various police and army checkpoints. The government 

69 



 

considered it dangerous for people from within the child-present zones to 
visit other areas and between Guzape and Maitama were areas considered 
unsafe. There were frequent reports of people being kidnapped and for 
ransom, their child. On the outside, there was an assumption that everyone 
in the zones had children and even if they didn·t, they had the money or 
ability to have one created. The transition from the area that had kids and 
didn·t was depressing. The atmosphere seemed gloomier, there were no 
colourful buildings representing schools and labs, often no electricity or 
water. It was just a stream of older faces counting down their days to death. 
The last of the naturally born people were slightly younger than Maseso.  

Maseso sat in the back row of the armoured coach that ferried her from 
Maitama to Jabi. It was a relatively short ride and the presence of two 
armed officers provided additional security. She hopped off at the Jabi 
transit station and noted that she had an hour before the return coach 
arrived. Doctor Ubong was not expecting Maseso but welcomed her, 
nonetheless. Having been in the business for longer, Ubong·s lab was larger 
with multiple calabash rooms and lab technicians weaving in between them. 
They sat on a balcony that offered a superb view of the lake and its 
surrounding greenery. 

´It·s been happening elsewhere,µ Ubong said after hearing Maseso out.  
This was a surprise to Maseso, though it brought with it some relief. ´Is 

it a contaminated batch of nutrients?µ  
Ubong shook her head. ´It doesn·t seem to be. Several reported cases 

used multiple vendors.µ 
In the silence that followed, Maseso also realized that if any of the tools 

they used were expired, contaminated or otherwise faulty, it would affect all 
the other foetuses. The problems would appear in batches, not isolated 
cases. She still had no answers but at least, Maseso now had something with 
which begin an explanation to the Senator. Perhaps get his support to fund 
an investigation and study.  

´Let me show you something from the Ministry,µ Ubong said, excusing 
herself. 

From the open balcony, Maseso watched her rummage through her 
desk. Ubong returned with her tablet, she sat down and looked over her 
shoulder and around before handing it to Maseso. What Maseso saw there 
couldn·t be real. A star with brownish-grey skin and darkened eyes. Maseso 
squinted, then zoomed into the picture. On the side of its neck were three 
slits that resembled gills. 

´Is it alive?µ she gasped. 
´Yes,µ Ubong said as she reached for the tablet and switched it off 

quickly. ´Keep your voice down.µ 
´Is this a mutation?µ she whispered. 
´Possibly,µ Ubong said, unaffected. ´I have sent some samples for 

70 



 

cytogenetic karyotyping and should get the results soon.µ 
´How did the parents react?µ 
Ubong leaned closer. ´They don·t know. See, what I·m about to tell you 

isn·t conventional, but there·s this scibalawo.µ 
´Ah! Not you too,µ Maseso·s expression fell. This was the kind of talk 

that Ego lived for. Always going on about the Aunt, that everyone called a 
scibalawo. The Aunt that specialised in cases where the supernatural 
influenced the technological or scientific. Any problem could be healed. 
Whether it was a haunted smart home system, An AI companion turned 
abusive lover or online games possessing young children and teenagers. All 
stories that were unreal to Maseso so it was shocking to hear an 
accomplished colleague like Ubong speak of them. 

´Listen, I can·t explain it either,µ Ubong shrugged. ´But what works 
works. And I have just shown you evidence that it works. If these clients are 
difficult, you have a way out.µ  

Scratching at her chin, Maseso asked. ´Is the hospital also working with 
her?µ 

´I can·t say for certain that the higher-ups are aware, but she·s slowly 
becoming an open secret in this business.µ 

´If this gets out, the country will be in ruins.µ 
´So far it·s still just a few unborn here and there but rumours are going 

around that the numbers are rising and more unborn will be affected.µ 
Ubong continued, ´If numbers increase and this reaches the public, at 

least the government will do something about it. We can conduct a formal 
study. In the meantime though, we need to deal with difficult couples 
ourselves.µ 

Maseso sunk deeply into the chair longing to be awakened from this 
nightmare. She declined when Ubong offered to add her to a group of their 
colleagues dealing with the same issue. Maseso thanked her before making 
her way back to Heavenly Babies and Mothers. She went through the 
motions, guiding her clients through their bonding times while ignoring the 
still unmoving ball in the incubator upstairs. Maseso moved with a sense of 
finality, knowing that if the Senator made good on his threat, her days of 
being in business were numbered. He could easily have her license 
withdrawn overnight. As night fell, Maseso climbed up to the stairs. She 
wiped her sweaty palms on her coat as she approached the room where 
incubators were kept. Oddly enough, the first thought that crossed her 
mind in the room was how much money she had spent on each unit. Then, 
she noticed that Xamidimura  wasn·t where Ego had placed it that morning. 
The colourful wax print scarf was also gone.  

Bewildered, Maseso rushed to the office, questioning her mind. Ego 
wasn·t there so she looked at the camera feeds, verbally commanding the 
AI to replay the days recording. When she saw the confirmation she was 

71 



 

searching for, Maseso groaned and leaned against her desk. The urgent 
sounds of people talking reached her from outside. Maseso dragged her feet 
to the back entrance where a paved path cut through a small garden leading 
to her living quarters. She saw Ego huddled next to an older woman, they 
both stood at a spot by the eastern wall. 

´Like this?µ Ego said. 
´Yes.µ 
That low voice drew goosebumps across Maseso·s flesh, her shock 

turned to anger as she marched towards them. The strange woman 
appeared older than Ego but younger than Maseso. She was dressed 
reasonably enough in a pair of jeans and a flowing top but even before Ego 
made the introductions, Maseso knew. 

´Ah, there·s my madam,µ Ego started. 
´Can I speak with you?µ Maseso tilted her head away with the intent of 

warning Ego sternly. But then she saw the freshly dug hole in the ground 
and Xamidimura floating in brown water. The dirt at odds with the sterile 
environment Maseso maintained. She screamed as she flew towards the 
hole wanting nothing but to get it out of there, but Ego held her back 
firmly. 

´How dare you!µ Maseso shouted, every vein in her bulged. 
´I promise, she can help.µ 
Maseso wasn·t backing down and it seemed Ego wasn·t going to either. 

They talked over each other with voices getting louder with each passing 
word.  

´You will tell me who is the boss here.µ 
´I have seen this woman grow a baby.µ 
´You·re fired!µ 
´Ehn! But let me save your business first!µ 
Maseso huffed, she hated being the one to first give in, but she was 

tired. The emotional turmoil of the day sapped her energy and she 
crumbled on the grass. It was only then that the Ego let her go. Maseso·s 
eyes were glued on Xamidimura     , speechless.  

´You should have told her now,µ the woman Ego called Aunt said, 
amused. 

Running a hand over her face, Maseso glared at her, taking in the 
baubles she wore around her wrists and neck. Maseso clenched her teeth, 
swallowed the insults that were on the tip of her tongue then looked 
towards the hole in the ground. The air seemed to stop around her as she 
paused. Xamidimura      had moved. Before she looked away it wasn·t in 
that position. Her head whipped towards Ego. 

´Why are you so stubborn?µ Maseso asked. ´This is my business, not 
yours. If any of our clients saw this.µ 

´I don·t trust Hajia Maimuna,µ Ego blurted out. ´It·s unfair for this 

72 



 

place to go down because of one couple and their juju, what of all the other 
stars?µ 

At least they were having a conversation now, Maseso knew she would 
have to let Ego go on. Just then, she heard a slight clearing of throat.  

´That baby is alive,µ the scibalawo said. A slight breeze brought the 
scent of perfume she wore to Maseso·s nose. When she looked at the hole 
again, this time Maseso saw the star·s chest move, its little chest rising and 
falling, limbs twitching.  

´This is an illusion,µ she stuttered. 
´No,µ the scibalawo replied. ´What you have here is a spirit child, they 

need more than your machines to enter this world.µ 
There was silence as Maseso stared on in disbelief. 
´You shouldn·t be here,µ Maseso sprang into action, regaining a bit of 

her composure. ´Enough with all of this, Ego escort this woman out and 
you go ahead with her.µ 

She watched them leave and when she looked at Xamidimura      again, 
it was still enough for her to be sure that it was devoid of life...until its 
mouth opened and shut. She didn·t want to touch it now, even to retrieve it 
from that hole. As Maseso rushed to ask Ego to return, she was baffled by 
her own actions. She found both of them at the end of the street waiting 
for the shuttle bus. Maseso coaxed them back to her property. 

At Maseso·s suggestion, Ego brought out an empty calabash from the 
store. From a pouch she carried, the scibalawo placed clay within it, then 
water. 

´Where is the fluid from?µ Maseso couldn·t help asking.  
´It is from the river goddess,µ the scibalawo replied curtly. She lifted the 

tiny foetus without flinching and placed it in the calabash.  
´You know, when our ancestors had premature babies,µ she said as she 

worked. ´They would sometimes put them in the earth. The clay has special 
properties. Every tool I use is special.µ 

Maseso watched as Ego and the scibalawo carried the calabash to the 
hole they·d dug earlier. It felt like someone else had taken her place and she 
was observing from afar. Maseseo would never have pictured this kind of 
activity happening in her lab. More clay was slathered over the calabash 
before the scibalawo began to sing in prayer.  

´Ego, would you power up the calabash?µ Maseso asked, unwilling to 
leave the garden just yet. 

When Ego returned after powering it up, Maseso found that she could 
check all Xamidimura's vitals remotely. She breathed in relief as finally, the 
scibalawo swirled a shot of gin in her mouth and sprayed it from between 
her lips onto the submerged calabash. 

´It is done.µ 
Ego clapped in glee. ´Thank you, Aunty,!µ 

73 



 

Maseso·s thanks came out more subdued. She was still in disbelief, 
unsure of what she had witnessed.  

      
For months, in the corner of the garden was a      mound resembling 

one meant for burial and within it, Xamidimura. No idea why this one 
preferred dirt to the sanitised fluid the others did. But in the earth, it 
breathed and thrived, waiting to be born.  

74 



 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 

 
NNEDI OKORAFOR is the Naijamerican PhD-holding, World Fantasy, 

Hugo, Nebula, Eisner Award-winning, rudimentary cyborg writer of 
africanfuturism, africanjujuism & Marvel·s Shuri. Her works include Who 
Fears Death (currently in development at HBO into a TV series), the Binti 
novella trilogy, The Book of Phoenix, the Akata books and Lagoon.  She is 
the winner of Hugo, Nebula, World Fantasy, Locus and Lodestar Awards, 
an Eisner Award nominee, and her debut novel Zahrah the Windseeker 
won the prestigious Wole Soyinka Prize for Literature. Nnedi has also 

written comics for Marvel, including Black Panther: Long Live the King 
and Wakanda Forever (featuring the Dora Milaje) and the Shuri series. Her 
science fiction comic series LaGuardia (from Dark horse) is an Eisner and 
Hugo Award nominee and her memoir Broken Places & Outer Spaces is a 
Locus Award nominee.  Nnedi is also creating and cowriter the adaptation 
of Octavia Butler·s Wild Seed with Viola Davis and Kenyan film director 
Wanuri Kahiu. Nnedi holds two MAs (literature and journalism ) and a 

PhD (literature). She lives with her daughter Anyaugo and family in Illinois. 
Follow Nnedi on twitter (as @Nnedi), Facebook and Instagram. Learn 

more about Nnedi at Nnedi.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 



 

 
RAFEEAT ALIYU is a writer and documentary filmmaker. Her short 

stories have been published in Strange Horizons, Nightmare, Expound and 
Omenana magazines, as well as Queer Africa 2 and the AfroSF Anthology 
of African Science Fiction anthology. Rafeeat is a Clarion West Graduate 

(2018). You can learn more about her on her website rafeeataliyu.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 



 

 
 

ABOUT THE EDITOR 
 

 
WOLE TALABI is a full-time engineer, part-time writer and some-time 

editor from Nigeria. His stories have appeared in The Magazine of Fantasy 
and Science Fiction (F&SF), Lightspeed, Omenana, Terraform, and several 
other places. He edited the anthologies These Words Expose Us and Lights Out: 

Resurrection and co-wrote the play Color Me Man.. His fiction has been 
nominated for several awards including the Caine Prize for African Writing 

and the Nommo Award which he won in 2018. His work has also been 
translated into Spanish, Norwegian, Chinese and French. His collection of 

stories, Incomplete Solutions, is published by Luna Press. He likes scuba diving, 
elegant equations and oddly shaped things. He currently lives and works in 

Malaysia. Find him online at wtalabi.wordpress.com/ and @wtalabi on 
twitter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 



 

 
 
 
 

ABOUT BRITTLEPAPER 
 
 

Brittle Paper is an online literary magazine for readers of African Literature. 
Brittle Paper is Africa·s premier online literary brand inspiring readers to 

explore and celebrate African literary experiences in all its diversity. 
 

AINEHI EDORO, Founder and Editor-in-Chief 
JACQULYN TEOH, Social Media Coordinator 

CHUKWUEBUKA IBEH, Staff Writer 
ANGELINE PETERSON, Reader 

 
Visit the Brittle paper website: brittlepaper.com 

 
Contact Brittle Paper  

Email, (info@brittlepaper.com) 
Social Media: Twitter and Instagram (@brittlepaper)