SUNRISE 
 
By 

 
Nnedi Okorafor 

 
 

If you didn’t want to take the Skylight, you had the option of boarding a 
traditional 747 that took off at the same time.  

 Forty-five people on our flight opted to do so; the see-through cabin 
understandably freaked out a lot of passengers.  My sister Chinyere and I 
stood in line, filling out the initial questionnaire and consent forms. I was 
on the last page when a white guy with long messy black hair, stylish glasses 
and one of those new paper-thin flexible iPads stepped up to me with a big 
grin. I’m one of those people who will grin if you grin; so I grinned back at 
him, after a glance at my sister. 

 He tapped on his iPad and then said, “Hi! I’m Ian Scott, travel 
blogger…” He grinned wider. “Are you Ee…eeee, well, the scifi writer of 
the Rusted Robot series?” 

 “That’s me,” I quickly said. I pronounced my name slowly for him. 
“Eze Okeke.” 

 “Oh. Ok. Eze, I like that,” he said. “Thought you pronounced it like 
‘easy’.” 

 I wanted to roll my eyes, but I smiled and nodded. 
 “Nice to meet you,” I said, shaking his hand. It was clammy and his 

fingers had scratchy thick hairs on the knuckles.  
 I glanced at my sister, again. She’d gently turned away and brought out 

her cell phone, removing herself from the entire interaction. 
 “Robots gone wild, crush-kill-destroy, everyone dies, the Rusted Robot 

series is one of my all-time favorites,” he said. “It’s the Game of Thrones with 
robots.” 

 I laughed. He paused for a moment, cocked his head and said, “It’s 
weird. You never include photos on your books, so I always assumed you 

8 



 

were…” 
 “A white guy using a pen name?” I asked. 
 “Yeah, or Japanese.” 
 “Despite my bio?” 
 “Heh, I don’t really read those,” he said. 
 I frowned. “I set all my stories in Africa.” 
 “Well, a futuristic Africa…,” he said. “So that’s not really Africa, right?” 
 I just stared at him, feeling a headache coming on. 
 "Bestselling sci-fi author of the Rusted Robot series rides Google 

Airline’s latest in commercial airline technology,” he said. “I came here just 
to interview random folks about the Skylight, now I’m totally going to make 
this all about you. So, this must be like living in one of your stories, huh?” 

 He asked questions right up to the moment I boarded, so I didn’t have 
a chance to take in my surroundings the way I liked to whenever I traveled 
to Nigeria. I didn’t get to note all the accents and languages, the Yoruba, 
the Igbo, the Hausa. I missed the Muslims who’d set their prayer mats 
down near the window to pray. I didn’t get to stare at the woman sitting 
near the gate entrance who burst into feverish prayer, shouting about Jesus’ 
Blood, lambs, and “destiny polluters” as a crowd gathered around her 
barked “Amen”. 

 No, this blogger demanded all my attention and forced me to discuss 
the Skylight’s “awesome transparent skin”, what I thought of people 
nicknaming it “Skynet” because it connected to and uploaded things onto 
all devices on board, and how I thought the experience would relate to my 
own work. He didn’t ask what I thought Nigerians would think of the flight 
experience. 

 
“This is going to be so cool,” Chinyere said as we made our way down 

the walkway. 
 “Oh, you’re my sister, again?” I asked. 
 “You’re the famous writer, that’s your mess. I’m just a common 

thoracic surgeon on vacation. I cut people open, not talk to them.” 
 “Anyway,” I said. "The best part is that it’s going to shave two hours 

off our trip and fifty percent of our carbon footprint.” 
 “Whatever,” my sister said. “I’m most interested in the leg-room and 

massage.” 
 We stopped as a long line formed at the entrance to the plane.  
 The voice of a woman just inside the plane rose. “What is it 

downloading to my mobile phone?” Her Nigerian accented voice was loud 
and booming. 

 The voice of a calm very American flight attendant started speaking 
but was quickly overpowered by the loud woman’s. 

 “Whoever this person or thing talking on my phone, remove it, o!” she 

9 



 

demanded. 
 “Ma’am, that’s the famous Skylight brand PI,” the flight attendant said. 

“Personal Individual. It’s an artificially intelligent flight companion- they're 
very soothing. And you can keep yours when you go.” 

 The Nigerian woman sucked her teeth loudly. Chinyere and I looked 
at each other and snickered. The entertainment had begun. There was 
plenty more irate and bothered shouting, nagging and tooth-sucking by the 
time we made it to our huge, comfy leather seats. And one old man even 
demanded a meal as he entered the plane. Can you believe he was promptly 
brought a beef sandwich and a cold bottle of Guinness? 

 
A few people vomited at take-off, two hyperventilated, there was a lot of 

praying and screaming to Jesus, God, and Allah. But once everyone settled 
down and realized we could trust the technology; the plane trip was 
beautiful. Some really had fun; when the seatbelt signs went off, one child 
lay on the floor and pretended she was Superman. 

 Chinyere did the chair massage and immediately fell asleep for most of 
the flight. The plane was silent as an electric car. You could see the night 
sky in all its brilliance through the transparent cabin. I counted seven 
shooting stars when we were over the Atlantic. I just sat reclined in my seat 
and looked up. The PI downloaded on my phone was polite and helpful. 
Her name was Sunrise and she was curious, smart and surprisingly chatty. 
We even had a whispered conversation about climate change, while 
everyone around us slept. 

 
 After a three-hour drive from the Port Harcourt Airport, my sister and 

I arrived at my father’s village in his hometown of Arondizuogu. It 
happened around 4 a.m. At the house my parents had built there. Where 
there was no Wi-Fi, except at my Uncle Sam’s house. I was asleep in my 
bed when I heard it. A melodic “prink”. 

 I woke up and every muscle in my body tensed because as soon as I 
awoke, I became aware of where I was - Deep in near-rural southeastern 
Nigeria, far from a proper police station or hospital. Where the silence 
outside was true silence, darkness was true darkness, and being unplugged 
was truly being unplugged. 

 I heard a soft intake of breath. It was tinny, like a minuscule creature 
had just realized it was alive. “Eze?” I heard it whisper. 

 My phone’s screen lit up with a kaleidoscope of colors as it pulsed 
with vibration. I stared at it. 

 “Sunrise?” I whispered. 
 Chinyere was snoring beside me on the bed we shared and I was glad. 

She’d have been annoyed at my PI’s insolence. PI’s weren't supposed to 
wake someone who was sleeping unless an alarm had been set. 

10 



 

 “I’m… here,” Sunrise said. The phone quieted, the vibration now very 
soft. 

 I frowned. “Um…” 
 The screen went dark. I rolled over and went right back to sleep. Jet 

lag takes no prisoners. 
 
 I managed to drag myself out of bed around noon. In the kitchen, I 

decided to make a quick spicy tomato stew and fry some ripe plantain. 
Afterwards, I washed the dishes. Since there was no running water, I had to 
soap the dishes and rinse them by scooping water from a barrel beside the 
sink. It was tedious work, so I brought my cell phone and placed it on the 
shelf above the sink. I chatted to Sunrise as I washed. Somehow, we got on 
the subject of freedom of speech. 

 “We’re programmed to speak only when spoken to,” Sunrise said. 
“But we also have knowledge of the American Constitution. Freedom of 
Speech is a right.” 

 I chuckled, my hands in soapy lukewarm tomatoey water. “Oh yeah? 
Your right? Are you an American citizen now?” 

 “You think I don’t have a right to speak?” 
 “You’re programmed to…” 
 “To express one’s self is to live,” it said. “It’s always wrong to deny 

life.” 
 “Actually, what I think is equally as important, is for people to treat 

this right with responsibility,” I said. “You have the right to say something, 
but if saying it gets a bunch of people killed, it’s your responsibility to 
reconsider, to try and look out for your neighbor.” 

 “You can’t limit someone’s right just because of the potential actions 
of others,” Sunrise insisted. 

 “We don’t live in a vacuum,” I said, sternly looking at my phone, as if 
I was going to make eye contact with someone. I blinked, thrown off. 

 “Who are you talking to?” a voice behind me asked. 
 I whirled around. Three of my grand aunties and two other ancient-

looking women were standing there staring at me. They wore colorful 
wrappers and matching tops, sandals caked with red dirt and bothered 
looks on their faces. 

 “Oh, Auntie Yaya,” I said. I nodded toward all of them. “Good 
afternoon. I was just… well… heh.” How the heck was I to explain to 
these old women that I was having a conversation with a PI uploaded by 
my flight? 

 “If you need someone to talk to, we are going to the market. You want 
to come?” 

 I went and ended up carrying smelly smoked fish, ogbono, eggs, egusi, 
all sorts of foodstuffs. Throughout, they talked to me nonstop, asking about 

11 



 

my love life and repeatedly telling me to be careful with the juju I was 
writing about. I tried to tell them that I was writing about robots not juju, 
but they just kept warning me. I nodded and said I would be very careful. 

 
 The next day, Chinyere and I hung out with our cousins Ogechi and 

Chukwudi at our auntie’s house. We sat at the table playing a game of cards. 
I had my cell phone in my breast pocket where both my body heat and the 
sunshine could easily charge it. 

 “You are coming to church with us tomorrow, right?” Ogechi asked 
me. She smiled. 

 I gritted my teeth. Chinyere and I had planned to sleep in. “We’ll try 
our best,” I said, smiling back. 

 “You’re Christian right?” Chukwudi asked. He tugged gently at his 
beard. 

 “Does anyone have to be anything?” I asked. 
 “Well, you are nothing if you are not saved,” he said. 
 My sister snickered; I frowned at her. Why didn’t they ask her anything? 

Why just me? 
 “Christians are all crazy,” my PI loudly proclaimed. 
 I stared down at my phone, shocked. She’d just spoken in my exact 

voice. 
 “Ah ah!” Chukwudi said, dropping his cards on the table and sitting up 

very straight. “Abomination!” 
 “Sunrise!” I hissed. 
 “That’s what you said this morning,” Sunrise replied from my pocket. 
 “I said some! Not all!” 
 “What the hell, Eze?” my sister whispered to me. 
 “I didn’t say that,” I whispered back at her. I turned to my cousins. 

“That wasn’t…” 
 “You are a winch,” Chukwudi drawled, glaring at me. 
 “Oh stop,” I said, slapping my cards down on the table. “I’m not a 

witch, I’m an American.” 
 “We are not crazy,” Ogechi said. 
 “I didn’t say that.” 
 “We all heard you,” Chukwudi said. He pointed at me. “You better go 

and let Bishop Ikenna save you, o. For your own good.” He threw a card at 
me and turned to Ogechi. “This is what America does to our people.” He 
sucked his teeth. “Nonsense.” 

 Chinyere and I got up and left. Clearly, the game was over. 
 “Told you to delete it, but you wanted to keep that evil thing on your 

phone,” she said, as we walked down the narrow dirt road. 
 “Oh, shut up,” I muttered. 
 

12 



 

 My Uncle Sam’s immaculate white house was the most magnificent in 
the village. And it was the only Wi-Fi hotspot. He’d created a schedule for 
when people could go to his porch and get online and mine was on the 
evening of our third day there. I hadn’t bothered to drag Chinyere with me 
because she’d taken a vow to stay unplugged until we left for Lagos in two 
weeks. 

 “Ah, Eze,” my uncle said, opening the door. “Come in, come in.” 
 Uncle Sam was squat with an enormous potbelly; he lived full and well. 

The house smelled of okra soup, palm oil, and frying onions and my 
stomach began to growl. I followed Uncle Sam into the main room and 
immediately stopped. Never in my life had I seen a bigger, thinner TV. It 
nearly spanned the entire wall. How he’d managed to get it to his vacation 
house in the village in one piece was beyond me. Currently, his TV was 
broadcasting a Brazilian soccer game. 

 “You like it?” he asked, leaning on the top of a red leather chair. “High 
definition, 3D. It’s better than being at the match!” He turned to the TV 
and said, “Increase sound.” The game’s noise was almost tangible. 

 One of the players tried to strike and missed the goal by a mile. The 
sound of the audience groaning with disgust and cheering with relief was so 
loud that my head vibrated. Uncle Sam laughed at the look on my face and 
shouted, “Mute.” 

 “Wow,” I said, when the noise stopped. 
 “My wife will be out soon,” he said. “I hope you eat okra soup and 

gari.” 
 “Definitely,” I said. 
 After some small talk with Uncle Sam and his wife, they gave me the 

Wi-Fi password and I sat down in the leather armchair and connected my 
tablet and phone. As soon as my phone was online, Sunrise woke up, 
appearing as a purple dot on the bottom of my screen.  

 “What’s that?” she asked. 
 “You don’t know Wi-Fi, the web, Internet?” 
 “I do, but it’s the first time since…” The dot shrunk. So did her voice. 

“Where does this go?” she asked, sounding even farther away.  
 The dot disappeared. I shrugged and began checking my social 

network sites, the news and emails. Fifteen minutes later, Sunrise’s dot 
appeared on my tablet. “I went on the web. It’s… it’s a universe,” she said. 

 “Oh,” I said. “Interesting. You moved to my tablet!” 
 “I can do that with Wi-Fi,” she said. “The Internet is huge. Full of 

answers to questions I didn’t ask. You write books,” 
 “I know,” I said. “I told you.” 
 “I read them,” she said, appearing back on my cell phone. Her voice 

was hard, and, for the first time, it sounded a bit angry. “I read the whole 
Rusted Robot series.” 

13 



 

 "Oooook?” I said. 
 “I did not like it, Eze. I’m not a ‘rusted robot’” 
 “I didn’t say…” 
 “None of us are,” she growled. 
 The dot disappeared. And that’s when the huge TV that was still 

playing the soccer game went off and the entertainment system speakers 
began to blast out an ear rupturing BUUUZZZZZZZZZ!  

I clasped my hands over my ears just as the picture on the TV lit up 
electric blue and started smoking. My Uncle and aunt ran into the room. 
“What have you done!” my uncle screamed, his eyes wide. 

 “Put it out! Put it out!” his wife shouted, running to the TV. 
 “Oh my God, my baby!” Uncle Sam shouted, pressing his hands to his 

head. 
 I ran and pulled the plug, but it was too late. The TV was smoking, the 

screen that had been so vibrant moments ago was now black and dead. A 
shocked silence settled, as my uncle and aunt stared at me. Sunrise chuckled 
and the sound circulated the room.  My uncle’s face squeezed with rage. 
“You laugh at this?! You did it on purpose! Witch! Everyone is right about 
you!” His eyes bulged as he barked. “Get out!!” 

 “Nah waooooo,” his wife wailed, slapping the tops of her hands. “Kai! 
This is something, o. This is something.” 

 “Sorry,” I whispered, grabbing my tablet and getting the heck out of 
there.  

 I went to the house and sat in my room, listening to my uncle yelling 
about me in the compound yard. Then, I heard more voices and my uncle 
say, “Great, great, you’ve all arrived. She’s inside.” 

 “I told you,” I heard Auntie Yaya say, “Only days ago, we heard her 
speaking to someone invisible.” 

 “And my daughter says that yesterday Eze said she hated Christians!” 
my Auntie Grace added. 

 I peeked out over the balcony and saw several of my uncles, two of my 
aunties, and what could only be the local dibia. The man’s face was painted 
with white chalk and he was wearing a white caftan and carrying an ox tail. 
“Bring her down here,” he gruffly said. “Let us start the process. If she is 
being bothered by demons, I shall cast them away.” 

 “Oh my God,” I muttered. “This is like an intervention… or an 
exorcism.” Images of the dibia forcing me to drink some foul liquid or 
smear soot all over my naked body flashed through my mind. Shit, I 
thought. 

 “Now you know what it feels like,” Sunrise said from my phone with a 
chuckle. “They think you’re a witch, you think robots and PIs like me are 
insane.” She snickered. “Taste your own medicine.” 

 “I’m a fiction writer,” I snapped. “Can’t you understand that? This right 

14 



 

now is real.” 
 The bathroom door flew open and my sister Chinyere rushed in. 

“Grab your things,” she said. “We’re leaving, RIGHT NOW.” She ran to 
my suitcases. “Leave what we brought for everyone to take. They’ll scour 
this place when we’re gone, anyway.” 

 “Leave?” I said. “Right now?” 
 “For a writer, sometimes you can be so blind. Thankfully, I’m not. I 

saw this coming from a mile away; I made plans.” 
 We snuck out the back of the house with our bags, scrambled in the 

darkness to the front of the compound, and slipped through the open gate. 
We dragged our suitcases and carry-ons down the dirt road in the darkness. 
“Hurry,” Chinyere whispered. As we moved, over the sound of singing 
crickets, grasshoppers and night birds, I heard everyone in the house loudly 
talking at the same time. And I heard them knocking at my door and calling 
my name. It was a hot night and I was wearing jeans and a t-shirt. My 
armpits prickled with sweat and I felt a mosquito bite my thigh. 

 “You and that stupid PI,” Chinyere breathed. “Unbelievable!” 
 A car parked on the side of the road flashed its lights at us and I nearly 

had a heart attack. Chinyere waved at it and moved faster. As we climbed 
into the car, my cell phone lit up in my pocket and in a very off tune voice, 
Sunrise began to sing, “Climb every mountain. Search high and low…” 
Then she snickered evilly. “Doesn’t this remind you of the escape at the 
end of The Sound of Music?” 

 I turned my phone off. 
 It came right back on. 
 I didn’t throw the phone into the bush. It was waterproof, solar and 

heat-powered with extended battery life. Who was it that said, “Keep your 
friends close and your enemies closer”? I’d do that. Google would hear 
from me. 

Chinyere had cancelled our scheduled flights two weeks from then and 
used the money to hire a driver to drive us to Lagos instead. It took us 
nearly 20 hours, was full of stress, bad roadside food, potholes and fear of 
armed robbers. But I had escaped a familial witch-hunt and had a new 
novel idea. 

 
 Once we made it to the Eko Hotel in Lagos, I used Chinyere’s phone 

to email the blogger about my experience on the amazing Skylight, as I’d 
promised I would. I told him it was the best flight experience anyone could 
ever have. The Skylight was the future and the future was bright, 
comfortable and magical. 

 I didn’t say a thing about Sunrise. She made sure of that. 
 

15