A Theory of
Adaptation
Second edition

Linda Hutcheon with
Siobhan O'Elynn

Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group

LONDON AND NEW YORK

PREFACE To THE SECOND EDITION
PLUS GA CHANGE

PLUS GA CHANGE!

No, things do not stay the same, not always, and certainly not in the
six years since
-2--eration

A 7heory ofAdaptation was first published. Flhe pro-

of adaptations has continued apace, of course; our thirst

retelling stories has not been quenched in the least.

But what has

nged is the availability of many new forms and platforms. New dig-

media have burgeoned in these last years. Now iPads and iPhones

become new sites for adaptive play. YouTube is the placement of
choice for many adapters—especially for the parodically inclined. Fan

=lüre has taken imaginative (and economic) possession of the fate
favorite stories. Social networking has altered forever the com-

—znication landscape. But we also witness familiar older films being

through computerization techniques. The coexistence of

new and the old, the digital and the analogue, is afait accompli: the
-—=stion remaining is whether this shift is one of degree or, more radior kind (see Jenkins 2006: 257). For adaptation studies, is ours a

Z=zsitional time or are we facing a totally new world?

XIX

xx

PREFACE TO

I

SECOND

had two main aims in writing A 'Theory ofAdaptation. nie

was to tackle head-on the subtle and not so subtle denigration 0-2
adaptation in our (late-Romantic, capitalist) culture that still tends
to value the "original," despite the ubiquity and longevity of adapta-

tion as a mode of retelling our favorite stories. And the second aim

was to consider the ever-widening range of forms of adaptations, vcell
beyond the fiction-to-film discussions that dominated the field in its
early years. To these ends, in Chapter 2 and again in Chapter 4, 'in

theorizing three possible modes of engagement with adapted stortes —telling,

showing, and interacting with—I also tried, throuch

the latter, to articulate my sense of something new and different hap-

pening in everything from videogames to interactive art installations
to hypertext fiction. It is not that reading a print book and watchinz
a film are not active, even Immersive, processes. '%ey clearly are. But

that "something new and different" was evident even in the grammar
to which I had to resort: some adaptational strategies; demand that wt

show or tell stories, but in others, we interact with them. The verbal
transitivity of showing and telling had to be replaced by the prepositional engagement of the "with" that signals something as physical

and kinetic as it is cognitive and emotional. This is true whether thi

medium be an iPad adaptation of T.S. Eliot's poem 7he Waste Lar.=
or a multi-platform site like Pottermore, designed not only as a vehick
for the electronic versions of the Harry Potter novels, but as mucz

much more.
I have chosen not to rewrite

A 7heory ofAdaptation in the light of these

recent changes, but rather to add to it.

"interactive" category

been expanded immensely by the rise of the newer digital media, b.
in ways that seem to me to be a continuation of the kind of thinkir.z

begun in the existing book. And my discussion of the growing role
fan culture in Chapter 4, in the context of" The Pleasures of Adapt atior-.
allows room for the expansion needed to further theorize the expr.
Sion of fan participation in adaptation that we have witnessed in the
years. But the lateral (not vertical—that is, evaluational and thus high

lower) continuum of adaptive relations outlined in the final chapter cv-

and should be rethought and retheorized in the light of the new mediæ

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Enter Siobhan O'Flynn, the one who has taught me everything I

Know about adaptation in the new media. It seemed fitting, therefore,
that she, not I, should move the field of adaptation studies forward in
her usual fearless way. Hence, her Epilogue—which, I can assure you,
will not be her last word on this emerging and constantly morphing
topic. As both a theorist and a practitioner,

she lives these immersive

oractices, and can speak with that double authority to the shift that has

altered not only the forms

of adaptation but also the economics and

:ven the ethics of the global entertainment and media industries.

MJhat's New about Media Change?
-a a word, nothing. In the sixteenth century,

Leonardo da Vinci's

rnural painting of the Last Supper was adapted into the form ofa Flem
Ish tapestry that hangs in Rome's Vatican Museum. Today, however,
-

media change" is not just a question of remediation. Digital is more

than a platform; it is changing the context in which films, for instance,

made, distributed, and consumed (see Perlmutter 2011). But of parZicular interest to adaptation studies is the fact that technology is also

altering how we actually tell and re-tell our stories, for it challenges

the traditional cinematic way of narrating: now, a new compendium of

zraphic text, still and moving images, sound, and a cursor or interac-

Eve touch screen IS to digital narration what cross-cutting, tracking
shots, and closeups are to narration that privileges the moving image
a-ad

sound. But because of those navigating devices, the new media

a•age us directly—in an individualized, indeed personalized manner
point to which

'I

shall return). As

Tom Perlmutter, the director of

National Film Board of Canada, recently put it, navigation is to
zzeractivity what montage is to film. lhis also means that the forward

moving temporal force of film is being replaced by the digital media's
=teractive, spatial movement.

nie conventions of storytelling—and story retelling—are changing
Zily, in other words. Again, this process of change is not new, but its

has certainly intensified and quickened and its forms multiplied

oanese cellphone novels are being adapted to print, often in anime
the ethical values ofthe story world of Harry Potter are adapted to
real world of social activism. The Harry Potter Alliance website asks:

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

xxii

Did you ever wish that Harry Potter was real? Well it kind of is.
Just as Dumbledore's Army wakes the world up to Voldemort's
return, works for equal rights of house elves and werewolves,

and

empowers its members, we: Work with partner NGOs in alerting
the world to the dangers of global warming, poverty, and genocide.

Work with our partners for equal rights regardless of race, gender,
and sexuality. Encourage our members to hone the magic of their
creativity in endeavoring to make the world a better place. Join our

army to make the world a safer, more magical place, and let your
voice be heard!

(http://thehpalliance.org/)

Without a crystal ball, it's hard to know whether all this adaptive
experimentation means that we are in a transitional phase or whether

something has changed definitively. Tie argument for transition could
be made by looking, as Siobhan O' Flynn does, at how the iPad's new
interactive and intermedial iBooks both integrate and transform the

conventions of the physical book through audio (sound and voice-over)
additions as well as by incorporating film animation and touch-screen

gaming design. But material books are arguably fighting back, adapting through inversion the visual layering technology possible on digi
tal platforms to the paper page: to create his 2010 book free of Codes,

Jonathan Safran Foer literally cut out most of the words of his favourite book, Bruno Schulz's Tee of Crocodiles, creating a physically multi-

layered, sculptural text that told his own story in the interstices (see

Figure 1).

As the author put it: "l started thinking about what books look like,
what they will look like, how the form of the book is changing very
quickly. Tf we don't give it a lot of thought, it won't be for the better.
Flhere is an alternative to e-books" (quoted in Wagner 2010). But that

alternative arguably adapts the layered visuality of a form reminiscent

of digital media (specifically, Photoshop). We may well "make sense
of novelty through the lens of history," defining "new technologies in
terms of older, more familiar ones" (Moore 2010: 181), but that process can also be reversed. Tie transitional can operate both ways with

adaptations.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

XXIII

Oce

Figure 1 Image from Tree of Codes by Jonathan Safran Foer. Reproduced with permisSion from Visual Edition

That said, in the last six years, what has become evident is that the

new entertainment norm, not the exception, is transmedia" storytell
ing: "a process

where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed sys-

tematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a

unified and coordinated entertainment experience. Ideally, each medium

makes its own unique contribution to the unfolding of the story" (Jenkins 2011; emphasis in original). As such it is more likely to target
different audiences

through different media:

not everyone wants to

watch the movie and play the game" (Dena 2009: 162)—but we may

want to enter the narrative and its world through some other medium
graphic novel, for example) or to access backstory or other charac
ters'

perspectives. (For more on adaptation in relation to transmedia,

see Dena 2009: 147—63.) In marketing terms, "franchise" storytelling

was certainly already driving some adaptational practices as I completed this book (see "The Economic Lures" section of Chapter 3), but

now, as the Epilogue explores in detail, franchising through transmedia design dominates the marketing strategies of the entertainment
industry. And in so doing, it is forcing a rethinking of certain aspects

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

XXIV

of adaptation theory. For example, when it is not a single, fixed, recognizable story that is being adapted, but rather an on-going, unstable,

open-ended "multitext," where do we draw the line at what we call an
adaptation? And what is it that is actually being adapted?

Stories vs. Story Worlds

The emphasis throughout A Theory ofAdaptation is on adapting narrative, but

when it came to analyzing videogame adaptations, I realized

that it was less the story itself than the story world, or what I called the

"heterocosm" (literally, an other cosmos), that was being adapted. In

transmedia storytelling, that fictional world is the core, for it becomes
the site of multiple possible storylines. Elhe Epilogue argues that this is
yet another change that demands the expansion of existing theories of
adaptation. Tie proliferation of franchise storytelling suggests to Clare

Parody that what is actually adapted is "a brand identity, the intellectual
property, advertising language, and presentational devices that cohere,
authorize, and market the range of media products that together comprise the franchise experience" (2011: 214).

7hematic and narrative

persistence is not the name of the new adaptation game; world building
is.

This also means that theorizing adaptation only in terms of rep

etition with variation 'becomes too limiting; what must be added is a

way to deal with the range of extensions or expansions of a story world
that not only transmedia producers but, as we shall see, fans too have

wrought.
It obviously becomes harder and harder to think in terms of "origi-

nal" or "source" stories or even story worlds when dealing with these

kinds of adaptations, because here simultaneity, not priority, reigns.

Movie and video game versions, for instance, are conceived and even
executed simultaneously; there is no single and prior adapted work.

Martin McEachern explains that film crews now work alongside video

game artists, who take photographs and record the proportions and
work closely with the film's production designers
and the visual effects team "to make sure their game upholds the same
textures of sets.

production values as the film.

.

.

[I]n this era of cross-platform mar-

keting and convergent technology, major film properties live twice—in
the movie theater and in the interactive realm" (2007: 12). But, as the

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

xxv

Epilogue explores, they live in many other realms besides these, realms
not always under the control of the major studios.

Who Is in Control?
The last decade has witnessed a major democratizing shift in media
production—through the sheer

(global)

reach

of the

Internet,

through software like iMovie and Photoshop, through web

plat-

forms like blogs and wikis, and through the ready availability of
low-cost (but high quality) recording and editing tools. As O'Flynn
argues in the Epilogue, this has had an impact on how adaptations
are not only produced

and controlled, but also distributed. In this

new media environment, "adaptation becomes a strategy of participations Rather than develop wholly new works, audiences take ownership over existing media, adapting the stories, shows,

and films

that they most identify with" (Moore 2010: 183). And nowhere has
this been more evident than in fan culture. YouTube, Facebook, and

Twitter have made it easy to adapt digital content, for that content is
not only accessible and repeatable, but also infinitely modifiable. In

our capitalist culture, it is no doubt needless to point out that this is
not always legal, despite the strong democratizing ethos of the Internet. (See

Legal Constraints" section of Chapter 3.) The Epi

logue analyzes a number of famous cases where copyright law and
fan adaptation practices have come into conflict, but it also carefully

nuances what is at stake in these struggles by pointing out that media
conglomerates paradoxically have an economic interest in fostering
fan devotion, while still attempting to retain sole control over the
intellectual property that garners them profits.

Fan-generated content has exploded in recent years, and not only
online, of course. Yet, when fans can remake their favourite films on

minimal budgets ("sweding") and then distribute them on YouTube,

who is in control? When they can adapt and thus personalize a video
game to suit themselves, should its creators greet this with "cease
and desist" letters or with joy at the free publicity? Fan loyalty can
obviously translate into sales, but it can also pose a threat to control

and ultimately to economic gain. When fans can not only view but
remix, interact with, and share content, an argument can be made

xxvi

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

that individual agency has trumped textual fidelity,

and with that,

ownership rights, For better or worse, the new media are participatory media.

What Else Has Changed?
Tie field of adaptation studies itself has grown immensely—and this
translates into a considerable

debates" were

still

change since 2006 when the "fidelity

ongoing (see Leitch 2008)—that is to say, when

adaptations were being judged in terms of quality by how close or far

they were from their 'original" or "source" texts. One of the reasons
for this emphasis was the fact that much of the early work in the field

had been based on comparative case studies of particular works, rather
than attempting to theorize more broadly the phenomenon of adapta
tion. With the important work of, first, Robert Stam, Kamilla Elliott,

Deborah Cartmell and Imelde Whelehan, and then others such as
Julie Sanders, Christine Geraghty, and

%omas Leitch, the critical ter-

rain has changed immensely, though vestiges of fidelity criticism still

remain in reviewing practices, especially of films adapted from beloved
novels.

Today, if "fidelity" is invoked at all in adaptation studies, it is usually, as in this

book (see Chapter 4's "Knowing and Unknowing Audi-

ences"), in the context of fan-culture loyalty rather than as a quality of

adaptive strategies. "The "success" of an adaptation today, in the age of

transmedia, can no longer be determined in relation to its proximity 'to

any single "original," for none may even exist. Perhaps it is time to look
instead to such things as popularity, persistence, or even the diversity

and extent of dissemination for criteria of success (see Bortolotti and

Hutcheon 2007: 450—53).

is

how biology thinks about adaptation:

in terms of successful replication and change. Perhaps cultural adapta-

tion can be seen to work in similar ways.

If it ever does, it will be because adaptation as a field of study has

been expanding its scope in recent years. New journals dedicated to
adaptation have appeared, but film and fiction still appear to remain at
the top of the list of major academic concerns: the title of Toe Journal

ofAdaptation in Film and Performance announces its limited focus, as
does the "literature on screen

mandate of the more generally-named

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

XXVII

journal, Adaptation. The canonization of literature-to-film adaptation
studies persists (see Cartmell and Whelehan 2007; Palmer 2007a and

2007b). Even the move to theorize adaptation in digital media has
often been film-oriented (see Constandinides 2010). But new collections of essays have broadened the range of both the theory and practice

of adaptation studies to include indigenization across cultures as

well as translation across languages (in Laurence Raw, ed., Translation,

Adaptaiion and T-ansformation [2012]; Tricia Hopton, Adam Atkin
son, Jane Stadler,

and Peta Mitchell, eds., Pockets of Change: Adapta-

tion and Cultural Tansition [2011]; and to some extent Rachel Carroll,
ed.,

Adaptation in Contemporary Culture: Textual Infidelities [2009]).

Interdisciplinarity now rules (see Sanders 2011: x). And therefore most

new works in the field have not been simple case-study compilations,
but rather serious engagements with theoretical issues as well, often

within a particular historical period, as in William Verone's Adaptation

and the Avant Garde (2011). The pedagogical focus of Nassim Bales
trini's

edited collection, Adaptation and American Studies: Perspectives

on Teaching and Research, acknowledges the increasingly evident reality of the educational importance and prominence of adaptation today.

(See also the textbooks on adaptation by Desmond and Hawkes [2005]

and Cahir [2006].) %ese provide yet further reasons for the addition of
the Epilogue here, in order to address not just film but also other new

media that are the site of adaptation for an entire new generation of
story (re)tellers and story-world makers.

Has anything not changed in the last SIX years? With some regret,

'I

still hear echoes of those all too familiar denigrations of adaptation today

in the context of transmedia storytelling where, in O'Flynn's account of

the industry debate currently underway, adaptation becomes a "lesser,

more simplistic mode of reworking content." Others point to a related
and repeated rhetoric of commoditization and commercialization that
haunts adaptation discussions of franchise storytelling (Parody 2011:
216). Some acknowledge that video game adaptations of films will prob-

a bly always be seen as derivative and secondary productions, "beholden
to" the prior adapted work (Moore 2010: 185). Yet, in practice, the con-

tinuing ubiquity and longevity of adaptational strategies across everc hanging

and ever-developing new media suggest a more optimistic

XXVIII

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

future where such dismissive evaluations just might disappear. Just as

biology does not evaluate the merit of organisms relative to their ances-

tors—for all have equal biological validity—so too may all cultural adap
tations one day be seen to have equal cultural validity.

1

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE
ADAPTATION:
What? Who? Why? How? Where? When?

[Clinema is still playing second fiddle to literature.

—Rabindranath Tagore (1929)
Writing a screenplay based on a great novel [George Eliot's
Daniel Deronda] is foremost a labor of simplification. I don't mean
only the plot, although particularly in the case of a Victorian novel

teeming with secondary characters and subplots, severe pruning is
required, but also the intellectual content.

A film has to convey

its

message by images and relatively few words; it has little tolerance
for complexity or irony or tergiversations. I found the work exceed-

ingly difficult,

beyond anything I had anticipated. And, I should

add, depressing: I care about words more than images, and yet I was

2

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION
constantly sacrificing words and their connotations. You might tell

me that through images film conveys a vast amount of information
that words can only attempt to approximate, and you would be right,

but approximation is precious in itself, because it bears the author's
stamp. All in all, it seemed to me that my screenplay was worth much
less than the book, and that the same would be true of the film.

—Novelist John North in Louis Begley's novel, Shipwreck (2003)

Familiarity and Contempt

Adaptations are everywhere today: on the television and movie screen,

on the musical and dramatic stage, on the Internet, in novels and comic
books, in your nearest theme park and video arcade.

A certain level

of self-consciousness about—and perhaps even acceptance of—their
ubiquity is suggested by the fact that films have been made about the
process itself, such as Spike Jonze's Adaptation or Terry Gilliam's Lost
in La Mancha, both in 2002. Television series have also

act of adaptation, like the eleven-part

explored the

BRAVO documentary "Page

to Screen." Adaptations are obviously not new to our time, however;

Shakespeare transferred his culture's stories from page to stage and

made them available to a whole new audience. Aeschylus and Racine
and Goethe and da Ponte also retold familiar stories in new forms.
Adaptations are so much a part ofYVestern culture that they appear to
affirm Walter Benjamin's insight that "storytelling is always the art of

repeating stories" (1992: 90).

critical pronouncements of T.S. Eliot

or Northrop Frye were certainly not needed to convince avid adapters
across the centuries of what, for them, has always been a truism: art is

derived from other art; stories are born of other stories.
Nevertheless, in both academic criticism and journalistic reviewing,

contemporary popular adaptations are most often put down as second
ary, derivative, "belated,

middlebrow, or culturally inferior" (as noted

by Naremore 2002b: 6). This is what Louis Begley's novelist-adapter
is

expressing in the epigraph; but there are more strong and decidedly

moralistic words used to attack film adaptations of literature: "tam
pering," 'finterference,"

violation" (listed in

"betrayal," "deformation,"

McFarlane 1996:

12),

perversion," "infidelity," and "desecration

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

3

(found by Stam 2000: 54). The move from the literary to the filmic
or televisual has even been called a move to "a willfully inferior form

of cognition

(Newman 1985: 129). Although adaptation's detractors

argue that "all the directorial Scheherazades of the world cannot add

up to one Dostoevsky" (Peary and Shatzkin 1977: 2), it does seem to
be more or less acceptable to adapt Romeo and Juliet into a respected
high art form, like an opera or a ballet, but not to make it into a movie,
especially an updated one like Baz Luhrmann's (1996) William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet. If an adaptation is perceived as "lowering" a story

(according to some imagined hierarchy of medium or genre), response
is likely to

be negative. Residual suspicion remains even in the admira-

tion expressed for something like Julie Taymor's Titus (1999), her critically successful film version

of Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus. Even

In our postmodern age of cultural recycling, something—perhaps the

commercial success of adaptations—would appear to make us uneasy.

As early as 1926, Virginia Woolf, commenting on the fledgling art
of cinema, deplored the simplification of the literary work that inevita
bly occurred in its transposition to the new visual medium and called
film a "parasite" and literature its

prey" and "victim" (1926: 309). Yet

she also foresaw that film had the potential to develop its own indepen-

dent idiom: "cinema has within its grasp innumerable symbols for emo
tions that have so far failed to find expression" in words (309).
it

And so

does. In the view of film semiotician Christian Metz, cinema "tells

us continuous stories; it 'says' things that could be conveyed also In the

language of words; yet it says them differently. %ere is a reason for
the possibility as well as for the necessity of adaptations" (1974: 44).

However, the same could be said of adaptations in the form of muslcals,

operas, ballets, or songs. All these adapters relate stories in their

different ways. They use the

same tools that storytellers have always

used: they actualize or concretize ideas; they make simplifying selections, but also amplify and extrapolate; they make analogies; they cri-

tique or show their respect, and so on. But the stories they relate are

taken from elsewhere, not invented anew. Like parodies, adaptations

have an overt and defining relationship to prior texts, usually revealingly called "sources." Unlike parodies, however, adaptations usually

openly announce this relationship. It is the (post-) Romantic valuing

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

4

of the original creation and of the originating creative genius that is
clearly one source of the denigration of adapters and adaptations. Yet
this negative view IS actually a late addition to Western culture's long

and happy history of borrowing and stealing or, more accurately, sharing stories.

For some, as Robert Stam argues, literature will always have axiomatic superiority over any adaptation of it because of its seniority as

an art form. But this hierarchy also involves what he calls iconophobia
(a

suspicion of the visual) and logophilia (love of the word as sacred)

(2000: 58). Of course, a negative view of adaptation might simply be
the product of thwarted expectations on the part ofa fan desiring fidelity to a beloved adapted text or on the part of someone teaching lit-

erature and therefore needing proximity to the text and perhaps some

entertainment value to do so.
If adaptations are, by this definition, such inferior and secondary
creations, why then are they so omnipresent in our culture and, indeed,

increasing steadily in numbers? Why, even according to 1992 statistics,
are 85 percent of all Oscar-winning Best Pictures adaptations?

Why

do adaptations make up 95 percent of all the miniseries and 70 percent
of all the

TV movies of the week that win Emmy Awards? Part of the

answer no doubt has to do with the constant appearance of new media

and new channels of mass diffusion (Groensteen 1998b: 9). %ese have
clearly fueled an enormous deman&for all kinds of stories. Nonetheless, there must be something particularly appealing about adaptations

as adaptations.

Part of this pleasure, I want to argue, comes simply from repetition

with variation, from the comfort of ritual combined with the piquancy
of surprise. Recognition and remembrance are part of the pleasure (and
risk)

of experiencing an adaptation; so too is change. Thematic and

narrative

persistence

Wuilleumier 1998:

combines with material variation

131),

(Ropars-

with the result that adaptations are never

simply reproductions that lose the Benjaminian aura. Rather, they
carry that aura with them. But as John Ellis suggests, there

is

something counterintuitive about this desire for persistence within a
post-Romantic and capitalist world that values novelty primarily: the
process of adaptation should thus be seen as a massive investment

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

(financial

and psychic)

5

in the desire to repeat particular acts of

consumption within a form of representation [film, in this case] that
discourages such a repetition" (1982: 4—5).

As Ellis' commercial rhetoric suggests, there is an obvious finanCial

appeal to adaptation as well. It is not just at times of economic

downturn that adapters turn to safe bets: nineteenth-century Italian
co mposers of that notoriously expensive art form, opera, usually chose
to adapt reliable—that is, already financially successful—stage plays or

novels in order to avoid financial risks, as well as trouble with the censors (see Trowell 1992: 1198, 1219).

Hollywood films of the classical

period relied on adaptations from popular novels, what Ellis calls the
"tried and tested" (1982: 3), while British television has specialized in

adapting the culturally accredited eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
novel, or Ellis' "tried and trusted." However, It is not simply a matter

of risk-avoidance; there is money to be made.

A best-selling book may

reach a million readers; a successful Broadway play will be seen by 1 to
8 million people; but a movie or television adaptation will find an audi-

ence of many million more (Seger 1992: 5).
recent phenomenon of films being "musicalized" for the stage is

obviously economically driven. The movies of 7he Lion King or 7he Producers offer ready-made name recognition for audiences, thereby reliev-

tng some of the anxiety for Broadway producers of expensive musicals.

Like sequels and prequels, "director's cut"

DVDs and spin-offs,

videogame adaptations based on films are yet another way of taking
one 'property" in a "franchise" and reusing it in another medium. Not
only will audiences already familiar 'With the "franchise" be attracted to
the new "repurposing" (Bolter and Grusin 1999: 45), but new consumers will also be created. Flhe multinationals

who own film studios today

often already own the rights to stories in other media, so they can be
recycled for videogames, for example, and then marketed by the televiSion stations they also own (%ompson 2003: 81—82).

Does the manifest commercial success of adaptations help us under
stand why the 2002 film The Royal Tenenbaums (directed by Wes Ander-

son with a script by Owen Wilson) opens with a book being checked
out of a library—the book upon which the film implicitly claims to

be based? Echoing movies like David Lean's Great Expectations (1946),

6

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

which begins with a shot of the Dickens novel opened to Chapter 1,
scene changes in Anderson's movie are marked by a shot of the Tenen-

baums' "book" opened to the next chapter, the first lines of which
describe what we then see on screen. Because, to my knowledge, this
film is not adapted from any literary text, the use of this device is a
direct and even parodic recall of its use in earlier films, but with a difference: the authority of literature as an institution and thus also of the

act of adapting it seems to be what is being invoked and emphasized.

But why would a film want to be seen as an adaptation? And what do

we mean by a work being seen as an adaptation?

Treating Adaptations as Adaptations

To deal with adaptations as adaptations is to think of them as, to use
Scottish poet and scholar Michael Alexander's great term (Ermarth

2001: 47), inherently "palimpsestuous" works, haunted at

all

times

by their adapted texts. If we know that prior text, we always feel its
presence shadowing the one we are experiencing directly. When we
call a work an adaptation, we

openly announce its overt relationship

to another work or works. It is what Gérard Genette would call a text

in the "second degree" (1982: 5), created and then received in relation
to a prior text. Flhis is why adaptation studies are so often comparative

studies (cf. Cardwell 2002: 9).

is

not to say that adaptations are

not also autonomous works that can be interpreted and valued as such;
as many theorists have insisted, they obviously are (see, for example,

Bluestone 1957/1971; Ropars 1970). This is one reason why an adaptation has its own aura, its own "presence in time and space, its unique

existence at the place where it happens to be" (Benjamin 1968: 214). I

take such a position as axiomatic, but not as my theoretical focus. To
interpret an adaptation as an adaptation is, in a sense, to treat it as what

Roland Barthes called, not a "work," but a "text," a plural "stereophony
of echoes, citations, references" (1977: 160). Although adaptations are
also aesthetic objects in their own right, it is only as inherently double-

or multilaminated works that they can be theorized as adaptations.

An adaptation's double nature does not mean, however, that proximity or fidelity to the adapted text should be the criterion of judgment or

the focus of analysis. For a long time, "fidelity criticism," as it came to

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

7

be known, was the critical orthodoxy in adaptation studies, especially

when dealing with canonical works such as those of Pushkin or Dante.
Today that dominance has been challenged from a variety of perspectives (e.g., McFarlane 1996: 194; Cardwell 2002: 19) and with a range

of results. And, as George Bluestone pointed out early on, when a film

becomes a financial or critical success, the question of its faithfulness
is

given hardly any thought (1957/1971: 114).

My decision not to con

centrate on this particular aspect of the relationship between adapted
text and adaptation means that there appears to be little need to engage

directly in the constant debate over degrees of proximity to the "origi

nal" that has generated those many typologies of adaptation processes:

borrowing versus intersection versus transformation (Andrew 1980:

commentary versus transposition (Wagner
1975: 222—31); using the source as raw material versus reinterpretation
10-12); analogy versus

of only the core narrative structure versus a literal translation (Klein

and Parker 1981: 10).

Of more interest to me is the fact that the morally loaded discourse
of fidelity is based on the implied assumption that adapters aim simply
to reproduce the adapted text (e.g., Orr 1984: 73). Adaptation is repeti-

tion, but repetition without replication.

And there are manifestly many

different possible intentions behind the act of adaptation: the urge to

consume and erase the memory of the adapted text or to call it into
question is as likely as the desire to pay tribute by copying. Adaptations

such as film remakes can even be seen as mixed in intent: "contested

homage" (Greenberg 1998: 115), Oedipally envious and worshipful at
the same time (Horton and McDougal 1998b: 8).
If the idea of fidelity should not frame any theorizing of adaptation
today, what should? According to its dictionary meaning, "to adapt" is
to adjust, to alter, to make suitable.

can be done in any number of

ways. As the next section will explore in more depth, the phenomenon

of adaptation can be defined from three distinct but interrelated perspectives, for I take it as no accident that we use the same word—adap-

ration—to refer to the process and the product.
First, seen as aformal entity orproduct, an adaptation is an announced

and extensive transposition of a particular 'work or works. Tlis
-transcoding" can involve a shift of medium (a poem to a film) or genre

8

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

(an epic to a novel), or a change of frame and therefore context: telling

the same story from a different point of view, for instance, can create a

manifestly different interpretation. Transposition can also mean a shift
in ontology from the real to the fictional, from a historical account or

biography to a fictionalized narrative or drama. Sister Helen Prejean's

1994 book, DeadMan Walking: An Eyewitness Account ofthe Death Penalty in the

United States, became first a fictionalized film (directed by

Tim Robbins, 1995) and then, a few years later, an opera (written by
Terrence McNally and Jake Heggie).
Second, as a Process of creation, the act of adaptation always involves

both (re-)interpretation and then (re-)creation; this has been called
both appropriation and salvaging, depending on your perspective. For
every aggressive appropriator outed by a political opponent, there is a
patient salvager. Priscilla Galloway, an adapter of mythic and historical
narratives for children and young adults, has said that she is motivated

by a desire to preserve stories that are worth knowing but will not necessarily speak to a new audience without creative "reanimation" (2004),

and that is her task. African film adaptations of traditional oral legends
are also seen as a way of preserving a rich heritage in an aural and
visual mode (Cham 2005: 300).

Tlird, seen from the perspective of its Process ofTecePtion, adaptation
is a

form of intertextuality: we experience adaptations (as adaptations) as

palimpsests through our memory of other works that resonate through
repetition with variation. For the right audience, then, the novelization

by Yvonne Navarro of a film like Hellboy (2004) may echo not only
with Guillermo del Toro's film but also with the Dark Horse Comics
series from which the latter was adapted.

Paul Anderson's 2002 film

Resident Evil will be experienced differently by those who have played

the videogame of the same name, from which the movie was adapted,

than by those who have not.
In short, adaptation can be described as the following:

An acknowledged transposition of a recognizable other work or
works

A creative and an interpretive act of appropriation/salvaging
An extended intertextual engagement with the adapted work

9

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

Iherefore, an adaptation is a derivation that is not derivative—a work
that

is

second without being secondary.

It is its

own palimpsestic

thing.

Tiere is some apparent validity to the general statement that adaptation "as a concept can

expand or

contract.

Writ large, adaptation

includes almost any act of alteration performed upon specific cultural

works of the past and dovetails with a general process of cultural recreation" (Fischlin and Fortier 2000: 4). But, from a pragmatic point of

view, such vast definition would clearly make adaptation rather difficult
to theorize.

My more restricted double definition of adaptation as pro

cess and product IS closer to the

common usage of the word and is broad

enough to allow me to treat not just films and stage productions, but
also musical arrangements

and song covers, visual art revisitations of

prior works and comic book versions of history, poems put to music and

remakes of films, and videogames and interactive art. It also permits me
to draw distinctions; for Instance, allusions to and brief echoes of other

would not qualify as extended engagements, nor do most examples of musical sampling, because they recontextualize only short frag-

ments of music. Plagiarisms are not acknowledged appropriations, and
Äequels

and prequels are not

really adaptations

either,

nor

fiction. There is a difference between never wanting a story to

is

fan

end—the

reason behind sequels and prequels, according to Marjorie Garber

2003: 73—74)—and wanting to retell the same story over and over in
different ways. With adaptations, we seem to desire the repetition as

much as the cha nge. Maybe this is why, in the eyes of the law, adapta
tiDn IS a "derivative work"—that is, one based on one or more preexist-

ing works, but "recast, transformed' (17

USC 5101). Elhat seemingly

•imple definition, however, is also a theoretical can of worms.

Exactly What Gets Adapted? How?
I

Vhat precisely is "recast" and "transformed"? In law, ideas themselves

cannot be copyrighted; only their expression can be defended in court.

And herein lies the whole problem. As Kamilla Elliott has astutely
zoted, adaptation commits the heresy of showing that form (expression)

can be separated from content (ideas)—something both mainstream
Esthetic and semiotic theories have resisted or denied (2003: 133),

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

10

even as legal theory has embraced it. The form changes with adaptation
(thus evading most legal prosecution); the content persists. But what

exactly constitutes that transferred and transmuted "content"?

Many professional reviewers and audience members alike resort to
the elusive notion of the spirit" ofa work or an artist that has to be cap'

tured and conveyed in the adaptation for it to be a success. rlhe "spirit"

of Dickens or Wagner is invoked, often to justify radical changes in the
"letter" or form. Sometimes it is "tone" that is deemed central, though

rarely defined (e.g., Linden 1971: 158, 163); at other times it is "style"

(Seger 1992: 157). But all three are arguably equally subjective and, it

would appear, difficult to discuss, much less theorize.

Most theories of adaptation assume, however, that the story is the

common denominator, the core of what is transposed across different media and genres, each of which deals with that story in formally
different ways and, I would add, through different modes of engage-

ment—narrating, performing, or interacting. In adapting, the story-

argument goes, equivalences" are sought in different sign systems for
the various elements of the story: its themes, events, world, characters,
motivations, points of view, consequences, contexts, symbols, imagery,

and so on. As Millicent Marcus has explained, however, there are two
opposing theoretical schools of thought on this point: either a story
can exist independently of any embodiment in any particular signify
ing system or, on the contrary,åt cannot be considered separately from
its

material mode of mediation (1993: 14). What the phenomenon

of adaptation suggests, however, is that, although the latter is obviously true for the audience, whose members experience the story in
particular material form, the various elements of the story can be and
are considered separately by adapters and by theorists, if only becaust

technical constraints of different media will inevitably highlight differ-

ent aspects of that story (Gaudreault and Marion 1998: 45).

Ihemes are perhaps the easiest story elements to see as adapt abl±
across media and even genres or framing contexts.

As author Louis

Begley said about the themes of his 1996 novel About Schmidt wher
the work was transcribed to the screen by Alexander Payne and Jir
Taylor: "I was able to hear them rather like melodies transposed in:
a different key" (2003:

1).

Many Romantic ballets were derived fro

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

11

Hans Christian Andersen's stories simply, some say, because of their
traditional and easily accessible themes, such as quests, magical tasks,

disguise and revelation,

and innocence versus evil (Mackrell 2004).

Composer Alexander Zemlinsky wrote a "symphonic fantasy" adap
tation of Andersen's famous
Little Mermaid" (1836) called Die
Seejungfrau (1905) that includes musical programmatic descriptions of

such elements as the storm and musical leitmotifs that tell the story and
its

themes of love, pain, and nature, as well as music that evokes emo

tions and atmosphere befitting the story.

A modern manual for adapt-

ers explains, however, that themes are, in fact, of most importance to

novels and plays; in

action and

TV and films, themes must always serve the story

reinforce or dimensionalize" it, for in these forms, story-

line is supreme——except in European "art" films (Seger 1992: 14).

Characters, too, can obviously be transported from one text to
another, and indeed, as Murray Smith has argued, characters are cruCial to the rhetorical and aesthetic effects of both narrative and perfor-

mance texts because they engage receivers imaginations through what
he calls recognition, alignment, and allegiance (1995: 4—6). The theater

-nd the novel are usually considered the forms in which the human
subject is central. Psychological development (and thus receiver empath3) is part of the narrative and dramatic arc when characters are the

of adaptations. Yet, in playing videogame adaptations of films,
can actually "become" one of the characters and act in their fic:ional world.

The separate units of the story (or the fabula) can also be transmedi2ted—just as they can be summarized in digest versions or transzed into another language

(Hamon 1977: 264). But they may well

-hange—often radically—in the process of adaptation, and not only

most obviously) in terms of their plot ordering. Pacing can be
—ansformed, time compressed or expanded. Shifts in the focalizaor point of view of the adapted story may lead to major differ-

When David Lean wrote, directed, and edited the film version
E.NI. Forster's 1924 novel Passage to India in 1984, he altered the
•.-el's

focalization on the two men, Fielding and Aziz, and their cross

=ltural interrelations. Instead, the film

tells

Adela's

story,

add

scenes to establish her character and make it more complex and

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

12

interesting than

it

arguably

in the novel.

is

More radically, Miss

Havisham's Fire (1979/revised 1996), Dominick Argento and John

Olon-Scrymgeour's operatic adaptation of Dickens' Great Expectations
(1860/1861), all but ignored the story of the protagonist Pip to tell that

of the eccentric Miss Havisham.
In other cases, it might be the point of departure or conclusion that
totally transfigured in adaptation. For instance, in offering a differ-

is

ent ending in the film version of Michael Ondaatje's novel The English
Patient, Anthony Minghella, in his film script and in his directing,

removed the postcolonial politics of the Indian Kip's response to the

bombing of Hiroshima, substituting instead another smaller, earlier

bomb that kills his co-worker and friend. In other words, a personal
crisis is made to replace a political one. As the movie's editor Walter
Murch articulated the decision: "lhe film [unlike the novel] was so
much about those five individual people: the Patient, Hana, Kip, Katharine, Caravaggio—that to suddenly open it up near the end and ask the

audience to imagine the death of hundreds of thousands of unknown

people

It was too abstract.

So the bomb of Hiroshima became the

bomb that killed Hardy, someone you knew" (qtd. in Ondaatje 2002:
213). And, in the movie version (but not in the novel), the nurse Hana
actually gives her patient the fatal morphine shot at the end, undoubt-

edly so that she can be seen to merge with his lover Katharine in the
patient's memory, as in ours.

On the soundtrack, their volces merge

as well. Tie focus of the film is on the doomed love affair alone. 7his

change of ending may not be quite the same as Nahum Tate's male
ing Cordelia survive and marry Edgar in his infamous 1681 version of

King Lear, but it is a major shift of emphasis nonetheless.
If we move from considering only the medium in this way to consid

ering changes in the more general manner of story presentation, however, other differences in what gets

adapted begin to appear.

is

because each manner involves a different mode of engagement on the
part of both audience and adapter. As we shall see in more detail shortly,

being shown a story is not the same as being told it—and neither is the

same as participating in it or interacting with it, that is, experiencing
a story directly and kinesthetically. With each mode, different things

get adapted and in different ways. As my examples so far suggest, to

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

13

tell a story, as in novels, short stories, and even historical accounts, is to

describe, explain, summarize, expand; the narrator has a point of view

and great power to leap through time and space and sometimes to ven
ture inside the minds of characters. To show a story, as in movies, ballets,

radio and stage plays, musicals and operas, involves a direct aural

and usually visual performance experienced in real time.

Although neither telling nor showing renders its audience passive
in the least, they also do not engage people as immediately and viscerally as do virtual environments, videogames (played on any platform),

or even theme-park rides that are, in their own ways, adaptations or

remediations" (Bolter and Grusin 1999).

The interactive, physical

nature of this kind of engagement entails changes both in the story

and even In the importance of story itself. If a film can be said to have
a three-act structure—a beginning in which a conflict is established; a

middle in which the implications of the conflict are played out; an end

where the conflict is resolved—then a videogame adaptation of a film
can be argued to have a different three-act structure. Elhe introductory
material, often presented in what are called "movie cut-scenes," is the
first act;

the second is the core gameplay experience; the third is the

climax, again often in filmed cut-scenes (Lindley 2002: 206). Acts one

and three obviously do the narrative work—through showing—and
set up the story frame, but both are in fact peripheral to the core: the

second-act gameplay, with
cal engagement,

its

intensity

of cognitive and physi-

moves the narrative along through visual spectacle

and audio

effects

challenges.

As Marie-Laure Ryan

(including music)

to the narrative success

and through problem-solving
has pointed out:

"The secret

of games is their ability to exploit the most

fundamental of the forces that move a plot forward: the solving of
problems" (2004c: 349). Story, in this case, is no longer central or at
least no longer an end in itself,

although it is still present as a means

toward a goal (King 2002: 51).

Although there has been a long debate recently about whether interactivity and storytelling are at odds with one another (see Ryan 2001

Rvan 2004c: 337), what is more relevant in a game adaptation
the fact that players can inhabit a known fictional, often striking,
t.-isual

world of digital animation. Nintendo's 3-D world of Zelda, for

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

14

instance, has been described as "a highly intricate environment, with
a complicated economics, an awesome cast of creatures, a broad range

of landscapes and indoor scenarios, and an elaborated chemistry, biology, geology and ecology so that its world can almost be studied like an
alternative version of nature" (Weinbren 2002: 180). Flhough Zelda is

not an adaptation, this description of its world fits so many games that
are adaptations. Similarly, Disney World visitors who go on the Alad

din ride can enter and physically navigate a universe originally presented as a linear experience through film.

What gets adapted here is a heterocosm, literally an "other world"
or cosmos, complete, of course, with the stuff of a story—settings,
characters, events,

and situations. To be more precise, it is the "res

extensa"—to use Descartes' terminology—of that world, its material,
physical dimension, which is transposed and then experienced through

multisensorial interactivity (Grau 2003: 3). This heterocosm possesses

what theorists call "truth-of-coherence" (Ruthven 1979: ll)—here,
plausibility

and consistency of movement and graphics within the

context of the game (Ward 2002: 129)—just as do narrated and per-

formed worlds, but this world also has a particular kind of "truth-ofcorrespondence"—not to any "real world" but to the universe of
particular adapted text. Tie videogame of 7he Godfather uses the voices

and physical images of some of the film's actors, including Marlon
Brando, but the linear structure of the movie is transmuted into that

ofa flexible game model in which the player becomes a nameless mafia

henchman, trying to win the respect of the main characters by taking
over businesses, killing people, and so on. In other words, the point

of view has been changed from that of the mafia bosses to that of the
underlings, who allow us to see familiar scenes from the film's world

from a different perspective and possibly create a different resolution.

What videogames, like virtual reality experiments, cannot easil}
adapt is what novels can portray so well: the "res cogitans," the space

of the mind. Even screen and stage media have difficulty with this
dimension, because when psychic reality is shown rather than told
about, it has to be made manifest in the material realm to be perceived

by the audience. However, expanding the idea of what can be adapted
to include this idea of a heterocosm or visual world as well as other

BEGINNING -ro THEORIZE ADAPTATION

15

aspects of the story opens up the possibility ofconsidering, for instance,

Aubrey Beardsley's famous illustrations for Oscar Wilde's play Salomé
as a possible adaptation or even Picasso's cubist recodings

of some of

the canonical paintings of Velåsquez.

Are some kinds of stories and their worlds more easily adaptable
than others? Susan Orlean's book, 7he Orchid 7hief, proved intractable to screenwriter "Charlie Kaufman" in the movie Adaptation.

Or

did it? Linear realist novels, it would appear, are more easily adapted
for the screen

than experimental ones, or so we might assume from

the evidence: the works of Charles Dickens, Ian Fleming, and Agatha
Christie are more often adapted than those of Samuel Beckett, James
Joyce, or Robert Coover. "Radical" texts, it is said, are "reduced to a

kind of cinematic homogenization" (Axelrod 1996: 204) when they
are adapted

But Dickens' novels have been called "theatrical" in their

lively dialogue and their individualized, if broadly drawn, characters,

complete with idiosyncratic speech patterns. tlheir strongly pictorial
descriptions and potential for scenes of spectacle also make them readily adaptable or at least "adaptogenic"

(Groensteen 1998a: 270) to the

stage and screen. Historically, it is melodramatic worlds and stories that

have lent themselves to adaptation to the form of opera and musical

dramas, where music can reinforce the stark emotional oppositions and
tensions created by the requisite generic compression (because it takes

longer to sing than to speak a line). Today, spectacular special effects
films like the various 7he Matrix or Star Wars movies are the ones likely
to

spawn popular videogames whose players can enjoy entering and

manipulating the cinematic fantasy world.

Double Vision: Defining Adaptation
Given this complexity of what can be adapted and of the means of
adaptation, people keep trying to coin new words to replace the con-

fusing simplicity of the word "adaptation" (e.g., Gaudreault 1998: 268).

But most end up admitting defeat: the word has stuck for a reason,
Yet,

however straightforward the idea of adaptation may appear on

the surface, it IS actually very diffcult to define, in part, as we have
seen, because we use the same word for the process and the product.

As a product, an adaptation can be given a formal definition, but as

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

16

process—of creation and of reception—other aspects have to be

a

considered. Tlis is why those different perspectives touched on earlier
are needed to discuss and define adaptation.

Adaptation as Product: Announced, Extensive, Specific Transcoding

As openly acknowledged and extended reworkings of particular other
texts, adaptations are often compared to translations. Just as there is

no such thing as a literal translation, there can be no literal adaptation. Nevertheless, the

study of both has suffered from domination

by "normative and source-oriented approaches" (Hermans 1985: 9).
Transposition to another medium, or even moving within the same
one, always

means change or, in the language of the new media,

"reformatting." And there will always be both gains and losses (Stam

2000: 62). Although this seems commonsensical enough, it is important to remember that, in most concepts of translation, the source text
is

granted an axiomatic primacy and authority, and the rhetoric of

comparison has most often been that of faithfulness and equivalence.
'Walter Benjamin did alter this frame of reference when he argued, in

The Task of the Translator," that translation is not a rendering of some
fixed nontextual meaning to be copied or paraphrased or reproduced,
rather, it is an engagement with the original text that makes us see that

text in different ways (1992: 77). Recent translation theory argues that

translation involves a transaction between texts and between languages

and is thus "an act of both inter-cultural and inter-temporal communication" (Bassnett 2002: 9).

newer sense of translation comes closer to defining adaptation
as well. In many cases, because adaptations are to a different medium,

they are re-mediations, that is, specifically translations in the form of
intersemiotic transpositions from one sign system (for example, words)
to another (for example, images). Flhis is translation but in a very specific
sense: as transmutation or transcoding, that is, as necessarily a recod-

ing into a new set of conventions as well as signs. For example, 'Harold
Pinter's screenplay for Karel Reisz's film 7he French Lieutenant's Woman

(1981) transposed the narrative of John Fowles' novel (1969) into a
totally cinematic code. Tie novel juxtaposed a modern narrator and a

Victorian story; in the equally self-reflexive movie, we have, instead, a

2CL) zuuaJuqaasuuv11/1 pollt30 0!Aotu u0F!A010J uv,u1JOD
.10d

put', OJt',1POUIU1!

KJOA s! poJt31sueJJ JO postuqduv,cl Buyoq

uo postq '(put',poos u:

SOUIPOUIOS •uotaeutssessv, Äpout10>1

soul?D 01Bt',JL Kq) papvopy

se qons 'sourefioop!A OJ

tu0JJ ofiu?J uln

OJ

uro.1J 'surly

ue oq

JXOJ poJcIv,pv

uoddv,q ut',o

u? JO suotav:

JJ!qs

Inyosn oq osp

1

pue

so!fiopue

oos) sy-100

•(VL—€LL :8661

Aq poJoo-1!p u111J 8661
exed .10 poxopuo.l
s,

„KJofieu1! tenSIA OAIJVIOOSSt3

(Cvm,ovva

Kpsuep
Luo-IJ ponyop

oqJ 11! poseaqclejed ST OIKJS

'It',ns1A

uoA0 'osuos

Kq ullY

Juops!utuo oqJ OJ

11! poaopuo.l

acu IOA0u s,xlnoacl Oluuy
u!

opt',tuoup

osserl JOJOOJ!T

pue sqooef uos10N Jetoqou .10J!JMJdyos
Jnq 'e

JS0q soqwosop

pue '.osuos

oq OJ poJJ!tupt', s! 00)
spJ0A\

s!

'pat01dxo Kldcue s!
•(€66L) snarv

IOA0u

OS Jou

s 10noz

opoqcI?J

001Aop oust1t30J

pozqensyy 11!

JO

ut post3JT4d

ohnfiuv,1

•fill!umoxpyo

JIOOA/\

.11',u

•ulJOJ

-10 JUOAO

OJLI! OJ!I s,uosxod

dep

'01dtuvxg

sclet1J?d

se pom0110J

Jd0>1 S! 10tpnt3 oqJ OJOIIAY 'opnanv

• •

su osexqde.lt',cl fitl!uyop se poJonb s! uopÄ.1(1 uqof

ohssed

'UOISUOJXO Kq 'Jnq Tt',q.10A s!

se

JO fiuyopuo.t oo-1J v,

OJ fill!p-toooe 'pue (eel?d)

puoJX()

JO ouo

as-ty

Sl

oppoq„ fill!110JJ0 opour

LIP,

s!

(79

:

s!

osuqd

OJ po-10+0 KIJuonbz:

•Kfioteue

t',

JO

JO

LL61/LS61 ou0Json1g)
•(ot-s€1

IOAou oqJJ0

ppzlqos

JO
JO JPOUI

pooqoo
oout',tuoel poJd!Jos oqJ Jno

Su 'BU!JOJJIUI

JO ssousnopsuoo-yps

put',

KsyoodÄz
•soill

oqJ Keld
poJv,1suee1J

•KJOJS KJtuuoo-tpuooJoutu oqJ JO

NOI-LYXdyav 3ZlU03HL OX

S

THEORY OF ADAPTATION

18

Wannsee Conference) was an 85-minute film adaptation scripted from
the actual minutes of the 85-minute meeting held in 1942 and chaired

by Reinhard Heydrich, the Chief of the German State Police, in which
the "Final Solution to the Jewish Question" was decided. In 2001,

Loring Mandel did a further adaptation in English for BBC and

HBO

called Conspiracy.

At other times, the adapted text is more complex or even multiple:
Sidney Lumet's 1975 film Dog Day Afternoon was a fictionalized adaptation of an actual 1972 bank robbery and hostage situation in Brook-

lyn that was covered live on television and was much discussed in the

media. In fact, a Life magazine article by P.E Kluge was the basis of
the film's screenplay. But in 2002 artist Pierre Huyghe asked the real
robber, John Wojtowicz, to reenact and narrate—in effect, to translate or paraphrase—the original event for his camera.

In the process,

a second-level adaptation occurred: as the perpetrator relived his own
past, what became clear was that he could not do so except through the

lenses of the subsequent movie version. In effect, the film became, for

him, as much the text to be adapted as was the lived event preserved in
either his memory or the media coverage. In ontological shifts, it makes
little

sense to talk about adaptations as "historically accurate" or "his-

torically inaccurate" in the usual sense. Schindler's List is not Shoah (see

Hansen 2001) in part because it is an adaptation ofa novel by %omas
Keneally, which is itself based on survivor testimony In other words,
it is

a paraphrase or translation of a Particular other text, a particular

interpretation of history. The seeming simplicity of the familiar label,

"based on a true story," is a ruse: in reality, such historical adaptations
are as complex as historiography itself.

Adaptation as Process
7he Adapter's Creative Interpretation/Interpretive Creation

Early in the

film Adaptation, screenwriter "Charlie Kaufman" faces an anguished

dilemma: he worries about his responsibility as an adapter to an author

and a book he respects. As he senses, what is involved in adapting can
be a process of appropriation, of taking possession of another's story,

and filtering it, in a sense, through one's own sensibility, interests, and
talents. Flherefore, adapters are first interpreters and then creators. Tlis

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

19

one reason why Morte a Venezia, Luchino Visconti's 1971 Italian film

is

version of Thomas Mann's 1911 novella Der Tod in Venedig, is so differ-

ent in focus and impact from Benjamin Britten and Myfanwy Piper's

English opera Death in Venice, which premiered only a few years later
1973. Tie other reason, of course, is the adapter's choice of medium.

E.H. Gombrich offers a 'useful analogy when he suggests that if an artist stands before a landscape with a pencil in hand, he or she will "look

for those aspects which can be rendered in lines"; if it is a paintbrush

that the hand holds, the artist's vision of the very same landscape will

be in terms of masses, not lines (1961: 65). Therefore, an adapter coming to a story with the idea of adapting it for a film would be attracted
to different aspects of it than an opera librettist would be.

Usually adaptations, especially from long novels,

mean that the

adapter's job is one of subtraction or contraction; this is called "a surgical art"

(Abbott 2002: 108) for a good reason. In adapting Philip

Pullman's trilogy of novels, His Dark Materials, from 1,300 print pages
to two three-hour plays, Nicholas Wright had to cut major characters
(for example, the Oxford scientist

Mary Malone) and therefore whole

.vorlds they inhabit (for example,

the land of the mulefas); he had to

•peed up the action and involve the Church right from the start. Of
course, he also had to find two major narrative climaxes to replace the

three of the trilogy. He also found he had to explain certain themes and

even plot details, for there was not as much time for the play's audience
--0

piece things together as there was for those reading the novels.

Obviously, not all adaptations involve simply cutting. Short stories,
particular, have often inspired movies; for example, John M.

Cun-

zingham's 1947 "The Tin Star" became Fred Zinneman and Carl Fornan's 1952 film High Noon. Short story adaptations have had to expand
their source material considerably.

When filmmaker Neil Jordan and

Angela Carter adapted Carter's story "Plhe Company of Wolves" in
•-984,

they added details from two other related tales in Carter's lhe

3100dy Chamber (1979): {'The Werewolf" and "Wolf-Alice.'

They took

contemporary prologue from Carter's own earlier radio play adapta-Eon to set up the dream logic of the piece. Screenwriter Noel Baker
•imilarly described his attempt to take "a whisper of a movie idea" and

zake it into a feature film. He had been asked to adapt not a short

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

20

story but, in fact, Michael Turner's book Hard Core Logo (1993), but
this book is a fragmentary narrative about the reunion ofa 1980s punk

band that is made up of letters, songs, answering machine messages
invoices, photos, hand-written notes, diary entries, contracts,

and so

on. Baker said that he first felt the challenge of the fragmentation itself

and then of the fact that it was "lean and spare, full of gaps and silences,
the eloquence of things left unsaid" (1997: 10). In the end, he noted
in his diary that this latter point was what made the task more fun,

more creative: "Must thank Turner for writing so little yet suggesting
so much" (14).

Of course, there is a wide range of reasons why adapters might
choose a particular story and then transcode it into a particular medium
or genre. As noted earlier, their aim might well be to economically and
artistically supplant the prior works.

are just as likely to want to

contest the aesthetic or political values of the adapted text as to pay

homage. %is, of course, is one of the reasons why the rhetoric of "fidel
ity" is less than adequate to discuss the process

of adaptation. What-

ever the motive, from the adapter's perspective, adaptation is an act

of appropriating or salvaging, and this is always a double process of
interpreting and then creating something new.

If this sounds somewhat familiar, there is good reason, given the

long history in the West of imitatio or mimesis—imitation—as what
Aristotle saw as part of the instinctive behavior of humans and the

source of their pleasure in art (Wittkower 1965: 143). Imitation of
great works of art, in particular, was not intended only to capitalize on

the prestige and authority of the ancients or even to offer a pedagogr
cal model (as the Rhetorica ad Herennium argued [l.ii.3

and IV.i.2]),

though it did both. It was also a form of creativity: "Imitatio is neither plagiarism nor a flaw in the constitution of Latin literature. It is
a dynamic law of its existence" (West and Woodman 1979: ix). Like
classical imitation, adaptation also is not slavish copying; it is a process

of making the adapted material one's own. In both, the novelty is in

what one does with the other text. Indeed, for "Longinus," imitatio went
together with aemulatio, linking imitation and creativity (Russell 1979:
10). Perhaps one way to think about unsuccessful adaptations is not in

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

21

terms of infidelity to a prior text, but in terms of a lack of the creativity

and skill to make the text one's own and thus autonomous.
or the reader, spectator, or listener, adaptation as adaptation

is

unavoidably a kind of intertextuality if the receiver is acquainted with the
adapted text. It is an ongoing dialogical process, as Mikhail Bakhtin

would have said, in which we compare the work we already know with
the one we are experiencing (Stam 2000: 64). By stressing the relation

of individual works to other works and to an entire cultural system,

French semiotic and post-structuralist theorizing of intertextuality
(e.g.,

in

by Barthes 1971/1977; Kristeva 1969/1986) has been important

its

challenges to dominant post-Romantic notions of originality,

uniqueness, and autonomy. Instead, texts are said to be mosaics of citations that are visible and invisible,

heard and silent; they are always

already written and read. So, too, are adaptations, but with the added
proviso that they are also acknowledged as adaptations of spectfic texts.

Often, the audience will recognize that a work is an adaptation of more

than one specific text. For instance, when later writers reworked—for

and even screen—John Buchan's 1914 novel, 7he 7hirty-

radio, stage,

-Vine Steps, they often adapted Alfred Hitchcock's

dark and cynical

•-935 film adaptation along with the novel (Glancy 2003: 99—100).

And

films about Dracula today are as often seen as adaptations of other earlier films as they are of

"Palimpsestuous" Intertextuality

For audiences, such

are obviously "multilaminated";

they are directly and

lhe Audiences

adaptations

Bram Stoker's novel.

openly connected to recognizable other works, and that connection is
oart of their formal identity, but also of what we might call their her-

meneutic identity. '%is is what keeps under control the "background
noise"

(Hinds 1998: 19) of all the other intertextual parallels to the

work the audience might make that are due to similar artistic and
social conventions, rather than specific works. In all cases, the engage-

ments with these other works in adaptations are extended ones, not
cassing allusions.

Part of both the pleasure and the frustration of experiencing an

zaptation

is

the familiarity bred through repetition and memory.

Depending on our relationship with any of the traditionally choreo-

zaphed versions of Tchaikovsky's 1877 ballet, Swan Lake (and there

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

22

are many of these, from the Petipa/lvanov one to its reworkings by

Ashton and Dowell), we will be

either delighted or irritated

by

Matthew Bourne's adaptation, with its updating and queer ironizing of
the popular classical ballet. His muscular male swans and their homo
erotic, violent, and sexually charged choreography allow, among many

other things, the traditional pas de deux between the prince and the

swan to be a dance of equals—perhaps for the first time. Ibis prince
is

no athletic assistant to a ballerina star. Not everyone In the audi-

ence will enjoy this transgression of and critical commentary upon the
sexual politics of the balletic tradition. But no matter what our response

our intertextual expectations about medium and genre, as well as about
this specific work, are brought to the forefront of our attention.

Tie

same will be true of experiencing the Australian IDance %eatre's
version, entitled Birdbrain (2001), with its hyperspeed edgy choreogra-

phy, film clips, and mechanized music. As audience members, we need

memory in order to experience difference as well as similarity.

Modes of Engagement

A doubled definition of adaptation as a product (as extensive, particular
transcoding) and as a process (as creative reinterpretation and palimpsestic intertextuality) is

one way to address the various dimensions of the

broader phenomenon of adaptation. An emphasis omprocess allows us to

expand the traditional focus of adaptation studies on medium-specificity
and individual comparative case studies in order to consider as well rela

among the major modes of engagement: that is, it permits us to
think about how adaptations allow people to tell, show, or interact with
tions

stories.

We can be told or shown a story, each in a range of different

media. However, the perspective, and thus the grammar, changes with
the third mode of engagement; as audience members, we interact with
stories in, for instance, the new media, from virtual reality to machin-

ima. All three

modes are arguably "immersive," though to different

degrees and in different ways: for example, the telling mode (a novel)

immerses us through imagination in a fictional world; the showing mode
(plays and films) immerses us through the perception of the aural and the

visual—the latter in a way related to that of Renaissance perspective
painting and Baroque trompe l'oeil (Ryan 2001:

3);

the participatory

'l

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

23

mode (videogames) immerses us physically and kinesthetically. But if all
are, in some sense of the word, "immersive," only the last of them is usu-

ally called "interactive."

Neither the act of looking at and interpreting

black marks—words or notes—on a white page nor that of perceiving

and Interpreting a direct representation ofa story on the stage or screen IS
in any way passive; both are imaginatively, cognitively, and emotionally
active.

But the move to participatory modes in which we also engage

physically with the story and its world—whether it be in a violent action

game or a role-playing or puzzle/skill testing one—is not more active but
certainly active in a different way.
'In

the telling

mode—in narrative literature, for example—our

engagement begins in the realm of imagination, which is simultaneously controlled by the selected, directing words of the text and liber-

ated—that is, unconstrained by the limits of the visual or aural. We
can stop reading at any point; we can re-read or skip ahead; we hold
the book in our hands and feel, as well as see, how much of the story

remains to be read. But with the move to the mode of showing, as in
film and stage adaptations, we are caught in an unrelenting, forward-

driving story. And we have moved from the imagination to the realm

of direct perception—with its mix of both detail and broad focus.

The performance mode teaches us that language is not the only way
to express meaning or to relate stories. Visual and gestural representa-

tions are rich in complex associations; music offers aural "equivalents'
for characters' emotions and, in turn, provokes affective responses In

the audience; sound, in general, can enhance, reinforce, or even coneradict the visual and verbal aspects.

On the other hand, however, a

hown dramatization cannot approximate the complicated verbal play
of told poetry or the interlinking of description, narration, and expla
nation that is so easy for prose narrative to accomplish. Telling a story
in words, either orally or on paper, is never the same as showing it visually and aurally in any of the many performance media available.

Some theorists argue that, at a basic level, there is no significant
difference

between a verbal text and visual images, that, as W.J.T.

Mitchell outlines this position, "communicative, expressive acts, narration, argument, description, exposition and other so-called 'speech acts

are not medium-specific, are not proper' to some medium or another"

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

24

(1994: 160). (See also Cohen 1991b.)

A consideration of the differences

between the modes of engagement of telling and showing, however,
suggests quite the contrary: each mode, like each medium, has its own
specificity, if not its

own essence. In other words, no one mode is inher-

ently good at doing one thing and not another; but each has at its dis

posal different means of expression—media and genres—and so can

aim at and achieve certain things better than others.
Consider, for example, the interesting technical task the British nov-

M. Forster set himself at one point in his 1910 novel Howards
End: how to represent in told words the effect and the meaning of perelist E.

formed music—music that his readers would have to imagine, of course,
and not hear. He begins the novel's fifth chapter with these words: "It
will be generally admitted that Beethoven's Fifth

Symphony is the

most sublime noise that has ever penetrated into the ear of man" (Forster 1910/1941: 31). Forster goes on to describe the effect on each

mem-

ber of the Schlegel family, whose ears this "sublime noise" penetrates.

In a telling mode, a novel can do this: it can take us into the minds

and feelings of characters at will. However, the focus of this episode,
in which the family attends a symphony concert in Queen's Hall in

London together, is specifically on one character, Helen Schlegel—
young, newly hurt in love, and therefore someone whose response to
the music is intensely personal and deeply tied to her emotional trou
bles at the time.

As the orchestra plays the third movement, we are told that she
hears "a goblin walking quietly over the universe, from end to end'
(32). In the first movement, she had heard "heroes and shipwrecks," but

here it is terrible goblins she hears, and an "interlude of elephants dancing" (32). These creatures are frightening because ofwhat Helen sees as
their casualness: they "observed in passing that there was no such thing
as

splendour or heroism in the world" (32). Forster continues, telling

us that: "Helen could not contradict them, for, once at all events, she

had felt the same, and had seen the reliable walls of youth collapse.
Panic and emptiness! Panic and emptiness! 'The goblins were right
(33). Totally moved, not to mention upset, by the end of the piece, she

finds she has to leave her family and be alone. As the novel puts it: "The

music had summed up to her all that had happened or could happen

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

25

in her career. She read it as a tangible statement, which could never be

superceded" (34). She leaves the hall, taking by mistake the umbrella

ofa stranger, one Leonard Bast, who will play an important part in the
rest of her life and, indeed, in the rest of the novel.

What happens when this told scene is transposed to the showing mode—in this case to film—in the Merchant/ Ivory production
adapted by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala?

concert, in a sense, remains,

but Helen attends alone. It is not a full orchestral concert this time,

but a four-handed piano performance, accompanying a lecture on
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.

A few of Forster's own words remain,

but very few. Because we can only see Helen on film and not get into
her head, we can only guess at her thoughts. So in the shown version,
it is

not she who experiences the "panic and emptiness" of the goblins;

it is

simply the lecturer who uses this as an Image in his explanation

of the piece In response to a question from a member of the audience.
In fact, Helen, from what we can see, seems rather more bored than
upset by the whole experience.

We do get to hear the full orchestral

version of the symphony on the soundtrack (nondiegetically), but only
after she leaves the hall, pursued by the young

man whose umbrella she

has taken by mistake.

Although Forster uses this scene to tell us about the imaginative and
emotional world of Helen Schlegel, the film makes it the occasion to

show us Helen meeting Leonard Bast in an appropriately culturally
loaded context. In terms of plot action, that is indeed what happens
in this scene,

and so this is what the film aims to achieve. Interest-

ingly, what the

showing mode can do that the telling one cannot is

to let us actually hear Beethoven's music.

We cannot, however, get at

Zhe interior of the characters' minds as they listen; they must visibly,
physically embody their responses for the

camera to record, or they

must talk about their reactions. Of course, this film contains lots of
oerformed talk about music, art, and many other things, and not only
in this rather overt lecture form.

Interacting with a story is different again from being shown or told

it—and not only because of the more immediate kind of immersion it
allows. As in a play or film, in virtual reality or a videogame, language

alone does not have to conjure up a world; that world is present before

A THEORY OF AD A p TAT O N

26

I

our eyes and ears. But in the showing mode we do not physically enter
that world and proceed to act within it. Because of its visceral impact,
a scripted paintball war game would be considered by some to be a

different kind of adaptation of a war story than, say, even the graphic

violence of a film like Saving Private Ryan (1998). Civil War battle

reenactments may involve role-playing, and new narrative media works

may require database "combinatorics," but, in both cases, the audience's
engagement is different in kind than when we are told or shown the
same story.
Stories, however, do not consist only of the material means of their

transmission (media) or the rules that structure them (genres). Those

means and those rules permit and then channel narrative expectations
and communicate narrative meaning to someone In some context, and
they are created by someone with that intent. %ere is, in short, a wider

communicative context that any theory of adaptation would do well
to consider. Elhat context will change with the mode of presentation

or engagement: the telling mode can use a variety of material media,
as can the live or mediated showing mode, just as each medium can

support a variety of genres. But media distinctions alone will not necessarily allow the kind of differentiations that adaptations call to our

attention. For instance, 'machinima" is a form of filmmaking that uses

computer game technology to make films within the virtual reality of
a game engine. As such, it's a hybrid form, but basically the medium is
electronic. 7he machinima adaptation of Percy Bysshe Shelley's

1817

poem "Ozymandias" (by Hugh Hancock for Strange Company) is
indeed a digitalized visualization of the poem's "story" about a man
walking across a solitary desert and finding a ruined statue of a king
inscribed with a chillingly ironic message about worldly glory and the

power of time. Even if the figure of the man on screen creates suspense
by having to wipe the sand off the final line of the inscription ("Look

upon my works, ye Mighty, and despair"), we experience little in the
digital vers10n of the frisson we feel reading the

poem's devastating

irony. Considering medium alone would not be useful to getting at the

success (or failure) of this adaptation: although this machinima is in a
digital medium, it is not interactive. If anything, the act of interpreting

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

27

what is really a shown story here IS even less actively engaging than
reading the told version.
Illis is

not to say that we do not engage differently with different

media, but the lines of differentiation are not as clear as we might
expect.

Tie private and individual experience of reading is, in fact,

closer to the private visual and domestic spaces of television, radio,

DVD, video, and computer than it is to the public and communal
viewing experience in a dark theater of any kind. And when we Sit m
the dark, quiet and still, being shown real live bodies speaking or sing-

ing on stage, our level and kind of engagement are different than when

we Sit in front of a screen and technology mediates "reality" for us.
When we play a first-person shooter videogame and become an active
character In a narrative world and viscerally experience the action,

our response is different again. Medium alone cannot explain what

happens when an interactive videogame is adapted into a museumdisplayed digital work of art, for it becomes a way to show, rather than
interact with, a story. For instance, in a piece by Israeli American video
artist

Eddo Stern called Vietnam Romance (2003), the viewer finds that

the game's enemies have already been taken out by the artist-shooter,
leaving us to watch—in other words, to be shown—only a series of

empty sets that have been manipulated to recall classic shots from war
films, from

to Apocalypse Now. In reversing the intended out-

come by breaking all the rules of game action, the artist has ensured
that the audience cannot and does not engage in the same manner as it

would with the interactive game. Likewise, Stern's Fort Paladin: America's

Army presents a scale model of a medieval castle within which a

•ideo screen reveals—again—the final results of the artist's mastery of
the U.S. military's game used for recruiting, also called America'sArmy.

Zhe work and the pleasure of the observing audience here are different

rom the kinetic and cognitive involvement of the interactive gamer.

Framing Adaptation
Keeping these three modes of engagement—telling, showing, and interActing with stories—in the forefront can allow for certain precisions

and distinctions that a focus on medium alone cannot. It also allows
zor linkages across media that a concentration on medium-specificity

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

28

can efface, and thus moves us away from just the formal definitions of
adaptation to consider the process. %ese ways of engaging with stories

do not, of course, ever take place in a vacuum. We engage in time and
space, within a particular society and a general culture. Tie contexts

of creation and reception are material, public, and economic as much
as they are cultural, personal, and aesthetic. This explains why, even In

today's globalized world, major shifts in a story's context—that is, for

example, in a national setting or time period—can change radically

how the transposed story is interpreted, ideologically and literally. How
do we react today, for instance, when a male director adapts a woman's
novel or when an American director adapts a British novel, or both—as
in Neil LaBute's film version of A.S. Byatt's 1991 novel, Possession? In

shifting cultures and therefore sometimes shifting languages, adapta
tions make alterations that reveal much about the larger contexts of

reception and production. Adapters often "indigenize" stories, to use

an anthropological term (Friedman 2004). In Germany, for instance,
Shakespeare's works were appropriated through Romantic transla
tions and, through an assertion of the Bard's Germanic affinity, used to

generate a German national literature. However strange it may seem,
this is why the plays of an enemy-culture's major dramatist continued

to be performed—with major variations that could be called adapta-

tions—throughout the two World Wars. The National Socialists, in
fact,

made these works both political, with psivate values stressed as

being subordinated to public ones in the tragedies, and heroic, with
leadership themes dominating (Habicht 1989: 110—15).

Even a shift of time frame can reveal much about when al work is
created and received. Robert Louis Stevenson's 1886 novel, 7he Strange

Case of Dr. Jekyll and MI. Hyde, has been adapted many times for the
stage and for the movie and television screens. (To get a sense of the

whole range, see Geduld 1983.) The showing mode entails embody
ing and enacting, and thereby often ends up spelling out important
ambiguities that are central to the told version—especially, in th1S case,

Hyde's undefined and unspecified evil. Because of mode change, these
various versions have
physically,

had to show—and thus to "figure"—that evil

and the means they have chosen to do so are revealing of

the historical and political moments of their production. In 1920, at the

BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

29

start of Prohibition, we witness a sexual fall through alcohol in John

Robertson's sile nt film; in the 1971 Hammer film, Dr. Jekyll and Sister

Hyde (directed by Roy Ward Baker), we see instead Britain's confused
responses to feminism after the 1960s (see McCracken-Flesher 1994:
183—94). For economic reasons, adapters often rely on selecting works to

adapt that are well known and that have proved popular over time; for
gal reasons, they often choose works that are no longer copyrighted.

I

Technology too, has probably always framed, not to mention driven,
adaptation, in that new media have constantly opened the door for new
,

possibilities for all three modes of engagement. Lately, new electronic

technologies have made what we might call fidelity to the imagina-

than a move obvious fidelity to reality—possible in new
ways, well beyond earlier animation techniques and special effects.

IVe can now enter and act within those worlds, through 3-D digital
technology. One of the central beliefs of film adaptation theory is that

audiences are more demanding of fidelity when dealing with classics,

such as the work of Dickens or Austen. But a whole new set of cult

popular classics, especially the work ofJ.R.R. Tolkien, Philip Pullman,

and J.K. Rowling, are now being made visible and audible on stage, in
the movie theater, on the video and computer screens, and in multiple

zaming formats, and their readers are proving to be just as demanding.

A1though our imaginative visualizations of literary worlds are always
highly individual, the variance among readers is likely even greater in
fantasy fiction than in realist fiction. What does this mean when these
-ans see one particular version on screen that comes from the direc-or's imagination rather their

own (see Boyum 1985)? Flhe answer(s), of

course, can be found in the reviews and the audience reactions to the

recent adaptations of Toe Lord of the Rings stories and the Harry Potter

Now that I know what an enemy orc or a game of Qyidditch

novels.

can) look like (from the movies), I suspect I will never be able to recapture my first imagined versions again. Palimpsests make for permanent

change.

Nicholas Wright's dramatic adaptation ofPullman's His Dark Materi
trilogy had to cope with the fact that the books had sold three million
Copies

and had been translated into thirty-six languages.

adapter

h Ad to find a way to visualize and then bring to physical life on stage—

A THEORY OF ADAPTATION

30

without the technological advantages of film—important elements that
the fans would demand be done well: things like the novels' multiple
parallel worlds, the windows cut to move characters into each world,

and especially the wondrous creatures known as "daemons "—animals
of the opposite sex that embody the inner soul of characters. %ese were
technical issues as well as imaginative ones, because Wright knew the
novels' fans would be a demanding audience.

two plays that were

finally seen in London at the National %eatre in 2003

and revised in

2004 were set within an elaborate "paratextual" context in order to prepare the audience and perhaps forestall any objections: the program was
larger and much more informative than most, offering photos, inter

views with the novelist and the adapter, maps, a glossary of places, people, things, and "other beings," and a list of literary intertexts.

As this suggests, a further framing of adaptation across all modes of
engagement is economic. Broadway adapts from Hollywood; noveliza
tions are timed to coincide with the release ofa film. November 2001
saw the infamous simultaneous international release of the film and
multiplatform videogame versions of the first installment of the story of

Harry Potter. Book publishers produce new editions of adapted literary
works to coincide with the film version and invariably put photos of the
movie's actors or scenes on the cover. General economic issues, such as

the financing and distribution of different media and art forms, must

be considered in any general theorizing of adaptation. To appeal to a
global market or even a very particular one, a television series or a stage

musical may have to alter the cultural, regional, or historical specifics

of the text being adapted.

A bitingly satiric novel of social pretense

and pressure may be transformed into a benign comedy of manners in

which the focus of attention is on the triumph of the individual, as has
happened in most American television and film versions of Ihackeray's
Vanity Fair (1848).

Videogames derived from popular films and vice

versa are clearly ways to capitalize on a "franchise" and extend its market.

But how different is this from Shakespeare's decision to write a

play for his theater based on that familiar story about two teenage lovers or, for that matter, from Charles Gounod's choice to compose what

he hoped would be a hit opera about them? In their different ways,

Giuseppe Verdi and Richard Wagner were both deeply involved in the

'BEGINNING TO THEORIZE ADAPTATION

--ancial aspects
-e

31

of their operatic adaptations, yet we tend to reserve

negatively judgmental rhetoric for popular culture, as if it is more

z:zted 'With capitalism than is high art.

beginning to explore this wide range of theoretical issues surroundadaptation, I have been struck by the unproductive nature of both

negative evaluation ofpopular cultural adaptations as derivative and

zondary and that morally loaded rhetoric of fidelity and infidelity used

omparing adaptations to "source" texts. Like others, I have found
asking whether we could use any less compromised image to

about adaptation as both process and product. Robert Stam, too,
seen one intriguing possibility in the film Adaptation, despite all its
---nies; because his focus is specifically on novel to film adaptation, he

—s an analogy between these two media and the film's dichotomous
'=tenwriting twins (or split personality).

He is also attracted to the

taphor of adaptations as hybrid forms, as "meeting places of different
—ecies,"' like the orchid (Stam 2005b: 2). For Stam, mutations—filmic

captations—can help their "source novel 'survive"' (3).
Because my focus is on modes of engagement rather than on two
Etcific media or on "sources," different things have caught my attenI was struck by the other obvious analogy to adaptation suggested

the film by Darwin's theory of evolution, where genetic adaptation

presented as the biological process by which something is fitted to a

Scen environment. To think of narrative adaptation in terms ofa story's
and its process of mutation or adjustment, through adaptation, to a
tlcular cultural environment is something I find suggestive. Stories
a-so evolve by adaptation and are not immutable over time. Sometimes,

biological adaptation, cultural adaptation involves migration to

conditions: stories travel to different cultures

and different

—edia. In short, stories adapt just as they are adapted

In his 1976 book on Darwinian theory called 7he Selfish Gene,

Richard Dawkins bravely suggested the existence of a cultural paralQI to Darwin's biological theory: 'Cultural transmission is analogous
genetic transmission in that, although basically conservative, it can
rise to a form of evolution" (1976/1989: 189). Language, fashions,

ehnology, and the arts, he argued, "all evolve in historical time in a
-

-cay that looks like highly speeded up genetic evolution, but has really

32

THEORY OF ADAPTATION

nothing to do with genetic evolution" (190). Nonetheless, he posits the
parallel existence of what he calls "memes"—units of cultural transmis-

Sion or units of imitation—that, like genes, are "replicators" (191—92).

But unlike genetic transmission, when memes are transmitted, they
always change, for they are subject to "continuous mutation, and also
to blending" (195), in part to adapt for survival in the "meme poole

Although Dawkins is thinking about ideas when he writes of memes,
stories also are ideas

and could be said to function in this same way.

Some have great fitness through survival (persistence in a culture) or
reproduction (number of adaptations). Adaptation, like evolution, is a
transgenerational phenomenon. Some stories obviously have more "stability and penetrance in the cultural environment," as Dawkins would

put it (193). Stories do get retold in different ways in new material and
cultural environments; like genes, they adapt to those

new environ-

ments by virtue of mutation—in their offspring" or their adaptations.

And the fittest do more than survive; they flourishe

